












































 

 
  

UNITED NATIONS  
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

-------- 
THE 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 

 

MINISTRY OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
----------- 

 
July 2016 

 

 

GOVERNMENT OF SIERRA LEONE 

ADVANCED DRAFT REPORT ON ADAPTATION OF 

THE GOALS IN SIERRA LEONE  

 

 



Table of Contents 
Acronyms......................................................................................................................................................... 3 

Executive Summary .......................................................................................................................................... 4 

1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................................. 7 

1.1 Background and Justification of the SDGs ................................................................................................. 7 

1.2 Objective of the Report ............................................................................................................................. 9 

1.3 Process of Domesticating the SDGs and Report Preparation .................................................................. 10 

1.4 Limitation of the Review Report .............................................................................................................. 11 

1.5 Organization of the Report ...................................................................................................................... 11 

2. Publication of Simplified Version of the SDGs .............................................................................................. 11 

3. Linking the SDGs to National Policy Regime ............................................................................................ 12 

3.1 Three National Development Plans to Implement in Sierra Leone ......................................................... 12 

3.2 The National Budget, Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity and the SDGs ............................................. 12 

4. Creating National Ownership for the SDGs .............................................................................................. 14 

4.1 Regional Consultations with Local Government Officials and CSOs and NGOs Operating at Provincial 

District Level ................................................................................................................................................. 14 

4.2 Consultations at National Level with Central Government, Trade Unions, the Private Sector Operatives, 
the Universities, CSOs, NGOs and the Donor Community ............................................................................. 15 

4.3 Consultation with Parliament .................................................................................................................. 20 

5. Process of Developing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System for the SDGs ............................................. 21 

6. Arrangement for Implementation of the SDGs............................................................................................. 24 

6.1 Policy and Reporting Framework ............................................................................................................. 24 

6.2 The New Deal ........................................................................................................................................... 24 

6.3 Regional and sub-regional dimension ..................................................................................................... 26 

7. Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................. 26 

7.1 Summary of the Adaptation Process and Key Lessons ............................................................................ 26 

7.2 Next Steps and Challenges ....................................................................................................................... 27 

Annex 1:The SDGs and Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity ........................................................................ 28 

Annex 2:Sierra Leone Specific SDGs Indicators ............................................................................................. 40 

Annex 2a: Tier1 Sierra Leone Specific SDGs Indicators with Baselines and Targets ....................................... 41 

Annex 2b: Tier2 Sierra Leone Specific SDGs Indicators (full list) ................................................................... 46 

 

 

file:///C:/Users/CPM&E%201/Documents/SDGs/New%20York/2016/2nd%20Retreat/Comment/04_07_16FinalDraft_NewYork2.docx%23_Toc455422814
file:///C:/Users/CPM&E%201/Documents/SDGs/New%20York/2016/2nd%20Retreat/Comment/04_07_16FinalDraft_NewYork2.docx%23_Toc455422814


Acronyms 

ACC  Anti-Corruption Commission 

BSL  Bank of Sierra Leone 

ECOSOC  Economic and Social Council of the United Nations  

EVD  Ebola Virus Disease 

HLPF  High Level Political Forum 

MAFFS  Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security 

MDAs  Ministries Departments and Agencies 

MEST  Ministry of Education, Science and Technology 

MFAIC  Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation 

MFMR  Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources 

MIA  Ministry of Internal Affairs 

MCS  Ministerial Committee on the SDGs 

MLCPE  Ministry of Lands, Country Planning and the Environment 

MLGRD  Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development 

MLSS  Ministry Labour and Social Security 

MMMR  Ministry of Mines and Mineral Resources 

MOHS  Ministry of Health and Sanitation 

MoE  Ministry of Energy 

MoFED  Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 

MoJ  Ministry of Justice 

MSWGCA Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender and Children‟s Affairs 

MTA  Ministry of Transport and Aviation 

MTI  Ministry of Trade and Industry 

MTCA  Ministry of Tourism and Cultural Affairs 

MWHI  Ministry of Works Housing and Infrastructure 

MWR  Ministry of Water Resources 

MoY  Ministry of Youth 

NAC  National AIDS Commission 

NaCSA  National Commission for Social Action 

NRA  National Revenue Authority    

ONS  Office of National Security 

PBS   Presidential Board of the SDGs 

SDGs  Sustainable Development Goals 

SLEPA  Sierra Leone Environmental Protection Agency 

SLIEPA  Sierra Leone Investment and Export Promotion Agency 

SLRA  Sierra Leone Roads Authority 

SLARI  Sierra Leone Agricultural Research Institute 

SSL  Statistics Sierra Leone 

UNDP  United Nations Development rogramme 

 



Executive Summary 

Country context 

The Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL) is 

strongly committed to the implementation of the 

United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 

(the UN SDGs) that succeeded the Millennium 

Development Goals (MDGs). The new agenda 

conveys renewed commitment by the UN to 

support global paths to sustainable development 

by 2030. The previous agenda, the MDGs, 

provided useful benchmarks that the government 

strove very hard to achieve despite Sierra 

Leone‟s weak start at the dawn of the 21
st
 

century due to a devastating decade-long civil 

war (1991-2001) that crippled the economy and 

human development.   

 

Unfortunately, while the government was staying 

the course of pursuing the MDGs to the end, the 

nation was struck by yet another devastating 

crisis, the outbreak of the Ebola Virus Disease 

(EVD) in May 2014. The disease killed an 

estimated 3,500 of about 8,000 infected persons. 

It caused unprecedented damage to the social and 

economic fabric of the country before it was 

officially declared over on 7
th

 November 2015. 

This human catastrophe was exacerbated by a 

coincidental crisis in the mining sector. As the 

disease was raging, the international price of the 

country‟s leading export commodity (iron ore) 

was crashing, compelling the two leading mining 

companies of the mineral to suspend operations 

for at least a year during 2014-2015.
1

 The 

economy phenomenally plunged during the twin 

crises. Growth in GDP decelerated from 15.2 

percent in 2012 and 20.1 percent in 2013 to 4.6 

percent in 2014. 
2
 The estimated growth for end-

2015 was minus 21.1 percent. Consumer prices 

skyrocketed and at least 2.3 million people had 

their livelihoods worsened during these crises.  

 

The combined effects of the twin crises badly 

affected progress towards meeting the MDGs, 

and undermined hopes of achieving the country‟s 

Vision 2035 of becoming a middle income 

                                                           
1
 The two financially challenged mining companies were 

replaced by new companies during this period. 
2
 See Sierra Leone National Ebola Recovery Strategy 

(2015, p.6), Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development, Freetown; the growth estimate for 2014 
was revised recently from 7 to 4.6 percent.  

country, anchored on the successive 

implementation of its poverty reduction strategy 

papers (PRSPs), the current one dubbed the 

Agenda for Prosperity (A4P, 2013-2018). These 

effects have continued to linger on to date, to the 

extent that the government is currently instituting 

tough austerity measures to revamp the 

economy. 

 

Progress on the MDGs 

Before the EVD struck in 2014, Sierra Leone had 

made progress in implementing the MDGs by, 

among others, integrating its goals in the national 

development plans, including the PRSP III/A4P. 

Two MDG reports had so far been prepared 

(2005 and 2010) and the country received a UN 

MDGs award in 2010 in recognition of the 

President‟s remarkable leadership commitment 

and progress towards achieving MDG 6. Various 

socio-economic surveys and sector reports 

indicated notable progress towards achieving a 

number of MDGs and the country was optimistic 

that several goals would have been achieved in 

2015. Poverty headcount had declined from 70 

percent in 2003, to 52.9 percent in 2013; 

prevalence of underweight children reduced from 

20 percent in 2004, to 16 percent in 2013; 

primary school completion rate stood at 76 

percent in 2013; the ratio of girls to boys in 

primary school was close to 100 percent; 

HIV/AIDS prevalence dropped from 1.5 percent 

in 2005, to 0.12 percent in 2015; access to safe 

drinking water increased from 36.7 percent in 

1990, to 62.6 percent in 2015; and mobile 

cellular subscribers increased from 14.3 percent 

in 2007, to 76.7 percent in 2014. A draft 2015 

MDGs progress report has been prepared. This 

end-programme report and various socio-

economic assessments including the Ebola 

Recovery Strategy show that the EVD reversed 

gains made in achieving several MDGs.  Indeed, 

serious challenges remained in a number of other 

areas, especially in reducing maternal and child 

mortality. In 2013, maternal mortality rate was 

1,165 deaths per 100,000 live births (1.17 

percent) and under-five and infant mortality rates 

were 156 and 92 deaths per 1,000 births (15.6 

and 9.2 percent), respectively. Huge room also 

remained for improving the protection of the 

environment and enhancing sanitation and 

hygiene. 

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 5 
 
 

 

 

Challenges and lessons going forward  

A number of challenges have emerged for Sierra 

Leone in the light of recent socioeconomic 

developments and their implications for the need 

to foster regional and global cooperation to 

ensure sustainable development. Poverty, 

vulnerability and inequality remain a concern. 

Additionally, to the extent that Sierra Leone 

could phenomenally suffer a cross-border 

infection to a monumental scale as witnessed 

with the Ebola virus, which originated from the 

Republic of Guinea, cements the fact that the 

regional and global dimension of a country‟s 

sustainable development cannot be 

overemphasized.    

 

Sierra Leone‟s economy remains fragile and 

vulnerable to external shocks. It is highly 

dependent on mining for foreign exchange 

earnings, which are unpredictable as 

corroborated in the recent crash of international 

price of its leading export commodity (iron ore), 

suggesting that the country must diversify its 

economy to grow and develop sustainably.  

 

Natural disasters are a continuous threat to the 

country. Recent disasters included massive 

flooding that decimated homes, business 

premises and claimed scores of lives in the 

capital city of Freetown and other regions just as 

the country was emerging from the scourge of 

the Ebola epidemic in August 2015, thus 

speaking highly to the need for SDG11 that 

warns states to ensure efficient management of 

towns, cities and population.  

 

Related to the foregoing is the increasing 

evidence of the negative effects of climate 

change, including rising sea levels and frequent 

flooding. Sierra Leone has been recently reported 

to be among the most vulnerable countries to the 

effects of climate change in the world.
3
 

Addressing these threats requires sustained 

                                                           
3
 http://standardtimespress.org/?p=5191.  

development cooperation and investing in 

attitudinal and behavioural change in 

consumption and production patterns, as well as 

in climate change-related disaster preparedness, 

such as early warning systems, and prevention 

planning.  

 

Other challenges include management of 

regional conflicts that require member countries‟ 

participation, such as responding to cross-border 

organized crime; terrorism; piracy; drugs and 

human trafficking; and illicit financial flows 

depriving Africa of scarce development 

resources. Youth unemployment requires greater 

attention in the pursuit of social stability and 

increasing capacity to administer justice.  

 

Leaving no one behind 

The domestication of SDGs in Sierra Leone has 

taken into consideration the principle of leaving 

no one behind, as this is an additional dimension 

to the special context and challenges the country 

faces, which require adequate response in 

fulfillment of this principle.  Accordingly, SDGs 

consultations and popularization process has 

taken into consideration marginalized and 

excluded groups, including persons with 

disabilities, women in rural areas, children, 

youth and the incarcerated, as well as households 

in informal settlements.  Statistics Sierra Leone 

and other government agencies are being 

sensitized to collect disaggregated (including 

spatial) data that enable effective policy making 

and tracking of relevant inequalities. 

Furthermore, upholding concerns relating to 

intergenerational environmental equity is crucial 

to the fulfillment of this objective; otherwise not 

only a huge cross-section of the present 

generation will be left behind but also, the 

sustained survival of those yet unborn could be 

doubtful. 

  

 What to do to overcome the challenges 
As gathered from the consultations, addressing 

these challenges requires development of a 

capable and effective state with sound 

http://standardtimespress.org/?p=5191


Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 6 
 
 

 

institutions, accompanied by robust monitoring, 

early warning and response mechanisms to 

respond to risks and threats accordingly and 

building on acquired strengthens as well as 

applying critical lessons learned. Having a well-

incentivized public and civil service system and 

a durable and robust peace infrastructure is all 

the more critical to ensuring sustainable 

development in the country; incentives that are 

accompanied by inculcation of integrity at work.    

 

Accession to the voluntary review and progress 

in adapting the SDGs in Sierra Leone  

It is against the above background that Sierra 

Leone has seen the SDGs as a timely opportunity 

to overcome development challenges ahead. We 

have therefore volunteered for the review at the 

July 2016 High Level Political Forum (HLPF) of 

the progress that Sierra Leone has made in 

integrating the SDGs into our national 

development processes.  

 

So far, we have published a simplified version of 

the SDGs, distributed copies to Parliament as 

well as the general public; and provided briefing 

to Cabinet. These have been followed by series 

of sensitization meetings and workshops with 

civil society and Non-Governmental 

Organizations, the local councils, a cross-section 

of university colleges, and the general public 

through radio and TV discussions. The Office of 

the President provides broad oversight to the 

SDGs adaptation process, while the Ministries of 

Finance and Economic Development and that of 

Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation 

provide operational, technical and diplomatic 

leadership.  

 

The SDGs were integrated into the 2016 

National Budget, and have been aligned to the 

Eight Pillars of Sierra Leone‟s third generation 

poverty reduction strategy paper. Technical 

workshops were organized to prepare Sierra 

Leone‟s SDGs adaptation report, which 

constitute the review report to present to the 

HLPF in July. A draft set of SDG indicators 

specific to Sierra Leone have been formulated.  

 

  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 7 
 
 

 

1. Introduction 

1.1 Background and Justification of the SDGs   

Sierra Leone implemented the MDGs during 

2000-2015. The Goals were operationalized 

within the framework of the country‟s national 

development plans, such as the poverty reduction 

strategy papers (PRSPs), which have been 

implemented since the end of the civil war in 

2002.  

 

In May 2014, towards the end of the MDGs, the 

country was struck by the Ebola virus disease 

(EVD), killing more than 3,500 people out of 

more than 8000 infection cases. The disease 

caused unprecedented socioeconomic damage 

before it was officially declared over on 7
th

 

November 2015. While women and children 

were the most affected, the most worrying 

situation was the high death toll the disease 

inflicted on our very limited population of health 

workers, killing 221 out of 296 infected doctors, 

nurses and other health personnel; 11 specialist 

doctors were among those lost.  

 

Sierra Leone had generally recorded positive 

achievements in the implementation of the 

MDGs in a range of development areas. The 

MDGs Progress Report 2015 shows that the 

poverty headcount had declined from 70 percent 

in 2003, to 52.9 percent in 2013; prevalence of 

underweight children reduced from 20 percent in 

2004, to 16 percent in 2013; primary school 

completion rate stood at 76 percent in 2013; the 

ratio of girls to boys in primary school was close 

to 100 percent; HIV/AIDS prevalence dropped 

from 1.5 percent in 2005, to 0.12 percent in 

2015; access to safe drinking water increased 

from 36.7 percent in 1990, to 62.6 percent in 

2015; and mobile cellular subscribers increased 

from 14.3 percent in 2007, to 76.7 percent in 

2014.
4
 (See Table 1.) 

 

                                                           
4
 Sierra Leone MDGs Report (2015, pp. 8-11).  

At the same time, not all MDGs targets have 

recorded desired progress, including the areas of 

fighting rural poverty prevalence (which is still 

close to 70 percent); child mortality (under-five 

and infant mortality rates recorded 156 and 92 

deaths per 1,000 births in 2013, respectively); 

and maternal mortality (recorded 1,165 deaths 

per 100,000 live births in 2013); although these 

mortality rates are considerably better than they 

were in 2000, when under-five, infant and 

maternal mortality rates were recorded at 286, 

170 and 1800 deaths, respectively.
5
  

 

The following challenges have especially 

emerged for the country in light of recent 

socioeconomic developments vis-à-vis realities 

across the entire world:    

 Poverty, vulnerability and inequality 
continue to remain a serious concern. 

These could have been seriously 

exacerbated by the one and a half years 

of devastation caused by the Ebola virus 

disease.  

 Sierra Leone was hit by twin crises 
during 2014-2015: while the EVD was 

raging, the international price of the 

country‟s leading export commodity (iron 

ore) was coincidentally crashing, 

compelling the two leading mining 

companies of the mineral to suspend 

operations. The twin crises saw the 

economy plummet from a GDP growth of 

15.2 percent in 2012, and 20.1 percent in 

2013, to about 7 percent in 2014 (from an 

estimated 11.3 percent for 2014 at the 

beginning of the year before EVD).
 6

 

Additionally, it was projected to grow by 

minus 23.5 by the end of 2015. 

  

                                                           
5
 Sierra Leone MDGs Report (2015, pp. 8-11). 

6
 See Sierra Leone National Ebola Recovery Strategy 

(2015, p.6), Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development, Freetown; the growth estimate for 2014 
was revised recently to 4.6 percent.  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 8 
 
 

 

  
Table 1: Summary Results of MDGs Implementation in Sierra Leone (2000-2015): Key Indicators 

Goal Indicators 
Baseline 2015 

Target 

2015  

Status 

% 

Achieved Year Estimate 

1. Eradicate 

Extreme 

Poverty and 

Hunger 

Hunger 1992 42.8% 21.4% 22.3% 96% 

Underweighted 

Children 
2004 21.1% 12.0% 12.9% 90% 

Extreme Poverty 2004 31.3% 0% 13.9% 56% 

Poverty Headcount 2004 70.0% 40% 52.9% 57% 

2. Achieve 

Universal 

Primary 

Education 

Male Literacy Rate 2000 40.0% 100% 76% 60% 

Female Literacy 

Rate 
2000 20% 100% 62% 53% 

National Literacy 

Rate 
2000 30% 100% 69% 56% 

Primary School 

Completion Rate 
2004 60% 100% 76% 40% 

Gross Enrolment 

Rate 
2004 104% 100% 125% 100% 

3. Promote 

Gender 

Equality and 

Empower 

Women 

Girl-Boy Ratio in 

Secondary 
2004 67.0% 100% 88% 65% 

Girl-Boy Ratio in 

Primary 
2004 91% 100% 100% 100% 

Women Seat in 

Parliament 
1997 6.3% 30% 12.1% 25% 

4. Reduce 

Child 

Mortality 

Infant Mortality 

Rate 
2000 170/1,000 50/1,000 92/1,000 65% 

Under-Five 

Mortality Rate 
2000 286/1,000 95/1,000 156/1,000 68% 

5. Improve 

Maternal 

Health 

Maternal Mortality 

Rate 
2000 1,800/100,000 450/100,000 1,165/100,000 47% 

6.Combat HIV 

and AIDS, 

Malaria, and 

Other Diseases 

No. of Malaria 

Deaths 
2013 4,326 1,082 2,848 46% 

Under-Five Children 

with Bed Nets 
2000 2% 100% 49.2% 48% 

HIV Prevalence 2005 1.5% 0% 0.12% 58% 

7. Ensure 

Environmental 

Sustainability 

Improved Sanitation 1990 10.1% 65% 48.7% 70% 

Improved Water 1990 36.7% 73% 63% 72% 

8. Develop a 

Global 

Partnership for 

Development 

Mobile Cellular 

Subscribers (per 100 

inhabitants) 

2000 0/100 - - 76.6% 

Source: Compiled from Sierra Leone MDGs Report 2015 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 9 
 
 

 

 National prices skyrocketed owing to 
over-dependence on international market 

for local consumption and production, 

while both air and sea transport was 

extremely disrupted during the epidemic. 

The message is that, the country cannot 

grow and develop sustainably without 

meaningfully diversifying the economy.  

 Natural disasters—such as health and 
environmental calamities—continue to 

occur at alarming proportion in the 

world. Sierra Leone is not an exception in 

this context, with the recent examples of 

(i) the Ebola epidemic of 2014-2015, and 

(ii) flooding disaster that decimated 

homes and claimed scores of lives in the 

capital of Freetown in September 2015.  

 Evidence of negative effects of climate 
change is increasingly becoming clear—

sea levels are rising; massive floods are 

becoming more frequent; and we are fast 

losing life in our surrounding 

environment including plants and animals 

that are extremely important for our 

survival. Sierra Leone is reported to be 

the third most vulnerable country to 

effects of climate change, after 

Bangladesh and Guinea-Bissau.
7
 In fact, 

emerging anecdotal evidence has it that 

Sierra Leone has descended to the second 

position from the bottom.
8
   

 Civil conflicts continue to remain 
widespread; and terrorism, piracy, and 

drugs and human trafficking are all 

becoming constant problems across the 

globe. Sierra Leone continues to be 

considered a fragile state, prone to 

suffering from the effects of these global 

problems. 

                                                           
7
 http://standardtimespress.org/?p=5191.  

8
 This was mentioned during the retreat held in Freetown 

to validate the SDGs Adaptation Report on 22
nd

 and 23
rd

 
June 2016; and engagement with parliament in Freetown 
on the SDGs on 16

th
 June 2016. 

 In addition to the effects of global 
financial crises that badly expose weak 

and donor dependent countries, illicit 

financial flows are increasing and causing 

substantial economic losses for least 

developed nations like Sierra Leone. 

 A lot remains to be desired with 
governance systems across the world: as 

wars continue to rage in various parts of 

the globe, millions continue to be 

displaced, leading to growing refugee and 

illegal migrant crises. While Sierra Leone 

is increasingly recording desired ratings 

in good governance and peace, it remains 

vulnerable to the effects of poor 

governance, conflicts and terrorism in 

other countries.   

Therefore, the Government of Sierra Leone is 

not oblivious of the endless opportunities 

presented by the SDGs, which have been 

launched as the new UN global development 

Agenda put together to succeed the MDGs. They 

are meant to build on and address the unfinished 

business of the MDGs, and confront these 

emerging challenges. The new agenda was 

adopted by all 193 Member States of the UN on 

25
th

 September 2015 in New York. With 17 

Goals and 169 targets, it will be implemented for 

another 15 years, starting from January 2016 and 

ending in December 2030. The new agenda 

provides an enhanced platform for international 

development cooperation and engagement to 

resolve these problems, a platform that fragile 

states such as Sierra Leone can increasingly 

leverage for international assistance to walk 

them out of fragility onto a sustainable path to 

prosperity.   

1.2 Objective of the Report  

The objective of this report is to inform the 

United Nations about the progress Sierra Leone 

has made in sensitizing stakeholders to the new 

goals and in adapting them to national 

development processes. It specifically provides 

status of initial steps undertaken by the 

http://standardtimespress.org/?p=5191


Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 10 
 
 

 

government to domestically implement the 

SDGs. It is submitted in response to UN‟s 

request to Member States wishing to be reviewed 

at the first High Level Political Forum (HLPF) 

on progress made in domesticating the SDGs in 

July 2016 in New York to forward such reports. 

1.3 Process of Domesticating the SDGs and 

Report Preparation     

The process was guided by the leading principle 

of Agenda 2030 (the SDGs) and the theme of the 

July 2016 HLPF, which is leaving no one 

behind. Among the key elements of this is 

ensuring broad participation and inclusiveness in 

the development process by all. The SDGs 

adaptation process in Sierra Leone has strictly 

followed this since September 2015. The country 

is broadly divided into four regions: the North, 

South, East and West, all housing 14 districts. 

Consultations were held at regional level, 

drawing participants from these districts, while 

others were organized at the national level in the 

capital of Freetown.  

 

Consultations were led by government 

institutions as well as non-governmental 

organizations on the SDGs. The government 

engaged middle to high-level officials from the 

public service, parliament, local government, the 

private sector, trade unions, civil society/non-

governmental organizations and universities. A 

segment of these actors, especially those from 

the trade unions, the private sector, CSOs and 

NGOs, were engaged to ensure onward 

dissemination of information on the goals to 

lower level development actors, including the 

local communities. Interactive radio and TV 

discussions were organized to reach out to the 

general public.  

 

Key topics discussed during public, regional and 

national engagements are as follows: 

 What the SDGs are and their general 
relevance to Sierra Leone 

 How were the SDGs prepared and who 
were involved in the preparation process 

 The relevance of the SDGs to Sierra 
Leone‟s socioeconomic development 

 What is meant by leaving no one behind 
and how do we achieve this 

 Ensuring effective balance between the 
three fundamental dimensions of 

sustainable development: social, 

economic and environmental dimensions 

 Integrating the goals into national 
development plans, including the Agenda 

for Prosperity and the National Ebola 

Recovery Strategy 

 Relevance of multidimensional approach 
to poverty measurement for the success 

of the SDGs 

 Data disaggregation and promotion of 
gender statistics recording and reporting 

 Harnessing Open Data Revolution for the 
SDGs in Sierra Leone 

 Rationalizing Sierra Leone international 
benchmarks to enhance efficient 

reporting on the SDGs    

 Challenges to the implementation of the 
SDGs in Sierra Leone 

 How can we make the SDGs better than 
the MDGs and what is the role of 

everyone in the process 

 Institutional arrangement for 
implementing the SDGs in Sierra Leone 

A range of workshops were organized across the 

country to undertake discussions and deliver 

SDG messages. These included a Data 

Revolution Roadmap for Sustainable 

Development Multi-Stakeholder National 

Workshop organized by the Right to Access 

Information Commission in Sierra Leone, 

drawing the participation of international 

partners. A coalition of CSOs and NGOs on the 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 11 
 
 

 

SDGs was formed and undertook community 

outreach programme to sensitize local 

communities on the new global agenda.   

 

In Government, the Ministry of Finance and 

Economic Development acts as the operational 

and technical lead in domesticating the SDGs, 

working in close collaboration with the Ministry 

of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, 

which provides diplomatic direction to the 

process, and the Office of the President, which 

provides broad policy and political oversight to 

national development processes.  

 

After intensive engagements with all relevant 

stakeholders including donor agencies, a national 

technical workshop was organized to validate 

and revise the country‟s Draft SDGs Adaptation 

Report submitted to the UN in December 2015. 

This has led to the production and submission of 

this final draft. Sierra Leone specific SDGs 

indicators were reviewed in the process, and 

baselines and targets were provisionally defined 

for indicators with available data (this will be 

discussed further below).  

 

The United Nations Development Programme 

(UNDP) provided most of the financial support 

to this process. Additional support came through 

the UNDP from the Government of Kazakhstan 

to support Sierra Leone‟s preparation for 

participation at the HLPF.        

 

1.4 Limitation of the Review Report  

This report only provides broad framework to 

guide more intensive SDG processes ahead. It 

highlights key efforts that have been made so far 

in integrating the SDGs into local development 

processes and immediate actions to follow after 

the HLPF.  A lot more needs to be done in 

integrating the goals into the planning process. A 

set of indicators for the country has been drafted 

but more consultations need to be undertaken to 

firm them up and start intensive data collection 

to establish comprehensive baselines and targets. 

The baselines and targets that have been 

established so far will require further validation 

and agreement among stakeholders. This will be 

followed by undertaking a comprehensive SDGs 

needs-based assessment to inform the 

preparation of an SDGs Investment Plan for the 

country, so as to determine required resources to 

achieve targets by 2030.      

1.5 Organization of the Report 

The following sections present the major initial 

steps undertaken by the Government to integrate 

the SDGs into the national development process. 

Section II talks about the publication of 

simplified version of the SDGs, while III 

highlights efforts at linking the SDGs to the 

national policy regime.  Section IV talks about 

activities undertaken to create national 

ownership for the SDGs, while V describes the 

process of developing monitoring and evaluation 

system for the goals. Section VI describes the 

institutional arrangement for their 

implementation, VII concluding the report and 

highlighting next steps.   

 

2. Publication of Simplified Version of the 

SDGs  

The first and immediate step undertaken by 

GoSL in the domestication process was a public 

sensitization on the SDGs through the 

preparation of a simplified version of the new 

agenda, which was produced and published on 

7
th

 November 2015. This covers (i) the 

transitioning from the MDGs to the SDGs; (ii) 

the reasons for embarking on the SDGs and their 

preparation process; (iii) the remaining and 

emerging challenges to address in the world; (iv) 

the correlation between the SDGs and Sierra 

Leone‟s development priorities as defined in the 

country‟s current PRSP—the Agenda for 

Prosperity—which sets the baseline for 

achieving Sierra Leone‟s Vision 2035 of 

becoming a middle income country; and (v) how 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 12 
 
 

 

the SDGs are expected  to be implemented in 

Sierra Leone.
9
  

 

3. Linking the SDGs to National Policy 

Regime  

3.1 Three National Development Plans to 

Implement in Sierra Leone   

The PRSPs have been the overall national 

development framework Sierra Leone has 

implemented since the end of the civil war. It 

was implementing the third generation PRSP, the 

Agenda for Prosperity (A4P), 2013-2018, when 

the Ebola virus broke out. The extensive social 

and economic damage caused by the disease 

necessitated the formulation of the National 

Ebola Recovery Strategy (NERS), with the 

objective of (i) ending and sustaining zero Ebola 

infections; (ii) restoring socioeconomic services; 

and (iii) returning the economy back on the track 

of sustainable development with effective 

implementation of the A4P. The NERS was 

completed and launched in July 2015 and is 

implemented until June 2017. On 25
th

 

September, the UN SDGs were launched, with 

all Member States required to implement them 

domestically.  

 

Thus, Sierra Leone faces the challenge of 

simultaneous implementing three key strategies: 

the A4P (2013-2018); the NERS (2015-2017); 

and the SDGs (2016-2030); all of which are 

critical to the sustainable development of the 

country. While the three plans are crucially 

important, however, their simultaneous 

implementation requires an integrated approach 

in order to ensure coherent and coordinated 

address of the differentiated but interrelated 

objectives they respectively seek to achieve.          

                                                           
9  See the Ministry of Finance and Economic 

Development for the simplified version.
 
  

 

3.2 The National Budget, Sierra Leone’s 
Agenda for Prosperity and the SDGs 
The SDGs constitute a major policy thrust in 

Sierra Leone‟s National Budget for 2016 Fiscal 

Year. The goals are aligned to each spending 

category of the Budget. In so doing, the Budget 

Statement has been able to start defining actors 

and their responsibilities for reporting on the 

SDGs within government MDAs competing for 

state resources and categorized under the various 

planned expenditure headings. An annex 

showing the link between the 17 SDGs and 169 

targets and the Eight Pillars of the Agenda for 

Prosperity, mapping MDAs to the goals, is 

included in the 2016 Budget, and is reproduced 

in this report as Annex 1. A summary of the link 

between the SDGs and these pillars is presented 

in Table 2, reproduced from the SDGs simplified 

version (2015, p.4).   

 

As reflected in Table 2, in Sierra Leone, the 

SDGs are more or less a recast of the country‟s 

leading development plan, the A4P (2013-2018), 

a national agenda to roll out beyond 2018 on the 

road to achieving Vision 2035. This strongly 

suggests that the SDGs and the A4P are deeply 

intertwined.     

In March this year, the Head of Civil Service and 

Secretary to Cabinet issued a circular to all 

government MDAs to submit to his office 

existing sectoral policies and their alignment to 

the SDGs with a view to determining gaps in 

policy orientation towards the new global agenda 

that Sierra Leone was a signatory to. In April, a 

presentation on the SDGs to top management of 

the civil service and respective institutions was 

done to debate the role expected of the public 

sector in the implementation of the SDGs in 

Sierra Leone. 

  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 13 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The following are highlights of broad areas the 

civil service is expected to work on to enhance 

the implementation of the SDGs in the country: 

 Sectoral policy and strategy 
alignment to the SDGs 

 Capacity development for 
preparation of bankable projects  

 Capacity development for 
implementation, monitoring and 

evaluation of  projects and 

programmes 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Increasing incentive systems and 
motivation for civil servants 

 Enhancing implementation of 
existing public service reform 

programmes 

 Enhancing implementation of 
performance appraisal systems 

 Strengthening government 
attitudinal and behavioural 

change programme 

 Enhancing records management, 
access to information,  

communication and technology 

development within the service 

Table 2: Linking Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity with the SDGs 

The 17 SDGs Regrouped Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity 

1) Reducing general poverty prevalence—

Goals  1,2&10  

2) Human development—Goals 3,4&6 

3) Gender parity—Goal 5 

4) Employment, economic growth and 

competitiveness—Goals 7,8&9 

5) Human settlement, housing and 

population infrastructure—Goal 11 

6) Environmental sustainability—Goals 

12,13,14&15 

7) Governance, peace and security—Goal 

16 

8) Means of implementing Goals 1 to 

16—Goal 17 

 

Pillar 1: Diversified economic growth—directly 

related to SDGs 7,8&9  

Pillar 2: Managing natural resources—directly 

related to SDGs 12,13,14&15 

Pillar 3: Accelerating human development—

directly related to SDGs 3,4&6 

Pillar 4: International competitiveness—directly  

related to SDGs 7,8&9 

Pillar 5: Labour and employment—directly   

related to SDGs 7,8&9 

Pillar 6: Social protection—directly related to 

SDGs 1,2&10 

Pillar 7: Governance & public sector reform—

directly related to SDG 16 

Pillar 8: Gender & women‟s empowerment—

directly related to SDG 4&5 

Source: Simplified Version of the SDGs prepared by GoSL (2015, p.4), p.4). 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 14 
 
 

 

 Introducing innovative means for 
mobilizing more domestic 

resources 

 Encouraging diaspora programme 
in the service to fill human 

capacity requirement 

 

4. Creating National Ownership for the SDGs 

 

4.1 Regional Consultations with Local 

Government Officials and CSOs and NGOs 

Operating at Provincial District Level 

These consultations, as those organized at the 

national level discussed below, provided relevant 

inputs into the national SDGs implementation 

planning process. Messages gathered from these 

discussions are summarized as follows: 

 

Leaving No One Behind 

 Political will is most critical to ensuring 
that no one is left behind in the 

implementation of the SDGS 

 It requires the government to create the 
enabling environment for every facet of 

society to be involved in the development 

process and be catered for   

 Requires conducting baseline 
assessments of the current socio-

economic and political status, using the 

17 goals as a guide 

 Calls for sustained international 
engagement to ensure that the problems 

of the weak and most exposed states to 

vulnerabilities are addressed 

Making the implementation of the SDGs better 

than the MDGs’ 

 Late disbursement of funds from central 
government to local councils during the 

MDGs phase was noted as a major factor 

to overcome to ensure successful 

implementation of the SDGs 

 Given the country‟s current fragility 
context, it will be important for the 

government to prioritize among 

development priorities 

 While decentralization has been pursued 
since the end of the civil war in 2002, 

there is still recognition of centralized 

national development planning, such as 

related to the preparation of the National 

Ebola Recovery Strategy; this must be 

discouraged going forward with the 

SDGs 

 Noted the need to learn from the late start 
the country experienced with MDGs to 

ensure that plans are put together quickly 

to implement the SDGs 

  Recommended official launch of the 
SDGs at regional and district levels 

 Local councils to play central role in the 
coordination of implementation of the 

SDGs at local level 

 Step up the fight against corruption 

 Rationalize role of different ministries, 
departments and agencies to reduce 

duplication of functions in the public 

sector 

 Improve coordination and collaboration 
at all levels 

 Strengthen domestic revenue 
mobilization to reduce dependency on 

donor funds in financing the SDGs, 

explore innovative financing solutions 

and increase economic diversification 

 Establish an effective M&E framework 

 Lessons learned in the implementation of 
the MDGs be reviewed and incorperated 

into the implementation strategy of the 

SDGs 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 15 
 
 

 

 

4.2 Consultations at National Level with 

Central Government, Trade Unions, the 

Private Sector, CSOs, NGOs, the Universities, 

and the Donor Community    

Substantial inputs to the SDGs process were 

made by representatives of these groups at 

national level. Intense debates involving panel 

and group discussions were organized.  

 

Discussions began in October 2015 with an 

engagement with a cross-section of CSOs and 

NGOs summoned by the then Minister of 

Finance and Economic Development. This initial 

engagement emphasized the continued 

challenges the world was facing, as the MDGs 

were coming to an end, and the opportunities the 

new global Agenda—the SDGs—was presenting 

to address these challenges, especially those 

affecting fragile states like Sierra Leone. It 

underscored the central role and responsibilities 

of CSOs in the implementation of the SDGs in 

Sierra Leone and the rest of the world. Box 1 

provides a summary of critical areas that CSOs 

pointed out during the meeting requiring special 

attention in the implementation of the new global 

goals. Box 1 also gives a summary of agreed 

actions going forward.
10

 

 

These discussions were also centred on the key 

topics and themes that would guide efforts to 

achieve the targets set in Agenda 2030, such as 

the principle of leaving no one behind; ensuring 

balance between the social, environmental and 

economic dimensions of sustainable 

development; and delivering the SDGs to their 

full potential.  

 

The key messages from the discussions are 

summarized as follows.  

 

                                                           
10

 Report of this meeting is available at the Desk of the 
National Coordinator of Non-State Actors in the Ministry 

of Finance and Economic Development.  

 

Leaving No One Behind  

Participation and socioeconomic inclusiveness  

 Government to develop detailed national 
engagement strategies on the SDGs that 

will carefully determine who to get 

involved in the process, and why they are 

important to communicate with, so as to 

generate optimum level of legitimacy and 

ownership to make the new agenda a 

success. 

 Engagement should be widespread, 
cutting across regional and political 

divide and concerns.   

 Prioritize the views of the vulnerable and 
minority groups, such as the physically 

challenged.  

 Youths constitute a great proposition of 
the population of Sierra Leone. But with 

many lacking the necessary capabilities 

(employability through enhanced 

education and training, for instance) to 

effectively participate in the labour 

market, there has been an inadvertent 

tendency to exclude them from active 

participation in formal economic 

activities.   

 Careful attention should be paid to the 
issue of youth development. From a long 

term development perspective, 

Government should sustain its efforts in 

increasing school enrolment and 

narrowing boy-girl ratio in school, 

ensuring that special focus is given to 

increasing retention of pupils in school; 

adult education be promoted; and 

intensification of vocational and technical 

education. 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 16 
 
 

 

  

Box 1: Outcome of the Initial Orientation Meeting between Civil Society Organizations and the 

then Minister of Finance and Economic Development in Freetown on 29
th

 October 2015  

--------------- 

A: Key Concerns Raised by CSOs 

a. The civil society expressed series of concerns about the feasibility of achieving a range of SDGs. For 

instance, they expressed that it will be an uphill task to achieve SDGs 1 and 11—ending  poverty in all 

its forms everywhere and making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe resilient and sustainable—

to which the Minister responded with optimism.   

b. They advised on the need to reflect on the successes and challenges of the MDGs as a starting point of 

the implementation of the SDGs. 

c. The need to ensure discipline, quality assurance and probity in the use of public resources were 

underscored as critical to the success of the SDGs and general development programmes.  

d. They emphasized the importance of performance contracts signed by Government ministries, 

departments, and agencies (MDAs) as central in ensuring effectiveness in service delivery.  

B: Actions Going Forward with the SDGs 

a. Ministerial annual performance contracts should be drawn from the National Budget to which the 

SDGs are firmly linked. This is critical for the participation of CSOs in monitoring the new global 

agenda alongside national development plans.  

b. Government should strengthen local revenue mobilization with a greater focus on taxes to increase 

economic resilience.  

c. Strengthen project implementation capacity. 

d. Strengthen the operations and management of non-governmental organizations that handle a great 

proportion of development resources.   

e. Set-up and implement effective national monitoring and evaluation systems to effectively track and 

report on development progress.  

f. Clearly map all relevant MDAs and other stakeholders in relation to their roles and responsibilities in 

following up and reporting on SDGs progress.  

g. Strengthen and restructure academic, technical and vocational institutions, introducing specialized 

courses so as to meet contemporary skills demand by employers and to ensure international 

competitiveness.  

h. The achievement of a range of SDGs, such as those relating to the environment and climate change—

11, 12, 13, 14, and 15—are dependent on behavioural change. Thus, great attention should be given to 

sensitization of the SDGs, with emphasis on behavioral change.  

i. To nationally determine the investment needs to achieve the SDGs. 

k. To map all CSOs to the relevant SDGs falling under their respective programme areas to 

enhance their participation and follow up in the implementation.  

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 17 
 
 

 

 Ensure that skills produced match 
demand in the labour market; fostering  

cooperation between knowledge 

production institutions, employers, trade 

unions and government and non-

government organizations in promoting 

skills alignment. 

 Short to medium term interventions to 
address youth unemployment could 

include establishment of youth farms at 

district level. 

 Promote public private partnership in 
ways that will include small scale 

economic operators, encouraging 

backward and forward linkages and their 

involvement in value chain development. 

 Women and girls constitute the majority, 
but still face unacceptable levels of 

exclusion in socioeconomic activities; a 

vast proportion of those engaged are 

unpaid, a situation more pronounced in 

the rural areas; thus affirmative action 

should be promoted while government 

sustains efforts at giving special support 

to girl child education. 

Disability issues and stigmatization   

 Persons with disabilities are noted with 
increased difficulty to access education 

and justice; need to interpret and enforce 

application of legislations covering the 

welfare of this vulnerable group. 

 Caring for the mentally challenged has 
left a lot to be desired, yet it has been 

reported across the world that a dollar 

spent on caring for mental challenges will 

engender far more than proportionate 

returns to economic growth and 

development. 

 Counter narratives are needed to reverse 
the negative stereotypes held on the 

situation of marginalized groups in 

general, including the sick.   

The incarcerated and the justice system in 

general  

 A major risk that fragile states face is the 
insufficient care paid to the imprisoned 

and remanded in correctional homes; 

many are remanded without indictment 

for several weeks, months and years, 

those eventually released not having a 

secure and sustainable livelihood in the 

absence of special interventions to 

rehabilitate their lives.  

 This is central in addressing the 
challenges facing the justice system as a 

cornerstone for the success of the SDGs. 

This makes the establishment of the 

Legal Aid Board in Sierra Leone a 

laudable venture by Government to 

pursue justice for these excluded groups, 

and to generally prevent dispensation of 

injustice from a proactive standpoint.  

 The hard-to-reach areas (especially the 
rural community) are especially prone to 

unjust acts and human rights abuses.  

 This requires promotion of non-formal 
justice systems, improving chieftaincy 

governance and community monitoring.      

Food insecurity and extreme poverty  

 Populations found in these conditions 
stand the risk of permanent deprivation 

with attendant negative impact on the 

development of children born into these 

circumstances. Coping strategies of such 

populations, for instance, can be 

detrimental to the environment through 

land degradation, deforestation and other 

negative activities.   



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 18 
 
 

 

 Thus, increased efficiency in targeting 
poverty resources and monitoring of 

delivery is critical.  

Island and coastal communities 

 Great risks abound among populations 
living in these areas as a result of their 

exposure to effects of climate change 

induced sea level rises that would 

eventually engulf and sweep swaths of 

these communities.   

 Communities along the coast and slum 
settlements in low lying areas in the 

capital city, as well as those inhabiting 

hilltops/hillsides, run the risk of being 

swept by waters from torrential rains.    

Natural resource management and future 

generations  

 Leaving no one behind is very much 
linked to making efforts to creating 

optimal balance in the three dimensions 

of sustainable development: the social, 

economic and environmental dimensions 

presented below. This is particularly 

important in the light of the centrality of 

ensuring responsible use of natural 

resources to ensure sustainable 

development. 

 An approach that leaves no one behind 
must care for both the present and future 

generation. Young people and those yet 

unborn will be the future decision 

makers; thus their livelihoods should not 

be compromised by actions of the current 

decision-makers with regard to the use of 

natural resources.     

Data disaggregation 

 In all of the above, having efficient data 
system and dissemination was 

extensively discussed. 

 An efficient data system should carry 
capability to disaggregate data to the 

extent possible to adequately reveal 

contexts underlying development 

phenomena to inform policies, 

interventions and targeting.  

 There is serious concern over the 
continued gender differentials across 

socioeconomic spheres, leading to the 

special emphasis on the need to improve 

gender statistics collection and reporting. 

 It is generally argued that until it is 
known and known properly it will be 

difficult to address it correctly and 

sustainably. 

 There is need to undertake in-depth 
analyses of the structural, financial, 

political and social drivers of inequality 

and exclusion in the country. 

Balancing the Economic, Social and 

Environmental Dimensions of Sustainable 

Development 

 

The Government of Sierra Leone has been 

mindful of this interconnectedness, as confirmed 

in its current poverty reduction strategy paper, 

the Agenda for Prosperity, which can be broadly 

divided into economic, social, environmental and 

political governance dimensions. The A4P 

respects the need for this balance, which is 

conceptually presented in Figure 1. The Eight 

Pillars of the A4P fall across these sustainable 

development dimensions as shown in the figure. 

Pillars 1, 4 and 5 fall directly under the economic 

dimension; Pillar 2 the environmental dimension; 

Pillar 3, 6 and 8 the social dimension; and Pillar 

7 under the political governance dimension. 

Indeed, sustainable development had been 

embedded in the national policy framework. 

What could be additionally needed is ensuring 

effective implementation of the respective 

interventions underlying these Eight Pillars in a 

manner that ensures balance and cross-

dimensional reinforcement in the four 

dimensions highlighted in the context of Sierra 

Leone.  

  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 19 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Specific messages from the national 

consultations on these issues are summarized as 

follows: 

 It was acknowledged that the narrative on 
increasing the balance between the 

dimensions of sustainable development 

was pivotal to the leaving no one behind 

campaign. 

 Measures taken now to reduce land 
degradation will benefit present 

generations socio-economically through 

improved food security as well as 

providing the basis for sustainable food 

production for future generations.  

 Those taken by current generations to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions globally 

and to build adaptive capacity locally will 

benefit present and future generations 

socioeconomically, and all put together 

can bring about good governance and 

political stability. 

 It was noted that no matter the level of 
GDP growth, it cannot be seen as 

development until the majority of society 

share in that growth through increased 

general employment accompanied by 

affordability of health services, 

education, and increased environmental  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

sanity and responsible exploitation of 

natural resource. 

 Improve environmental governance and 
increase use of environmental impact 

assessments and other policy monitoring 

instruments. 

 Increase the capacity of Sierra Leone‟s 
Environmental Protection Agency. 

 Increase collaboration and coordination 
among all actors, government MDAs and 

others whose operations or mandate have 

implications for the health of the 

environment and use of natural resources; 

rationalizing their functions where 

necessary to increase efficiency. 

 Increase enforcement of policies and 
legislations  

Delivering the SDGs to their full potential 

for the country 

 Incorporate lessons learned from the 
MDGs in the process of implementing 

the SDGs. 

 Stimulate private sector activities and 
diversify the economy, paying great 

attention to development and 

transformation of agriculture that 

Pillar 1: Diversified economic growth  

Pillar 2: Managing natural resources 

Pillar 3: Accelerating human development 

Pillar 4: International competitiveness 

Pillar 5: Labour and employment 

Pillar 6: Social protection 

Pillar 7: Governance & public sector reform 

Pillar 8: Gender & women‟s empowerment 

Economic dimension 

Environmental dimension 

Social dimension 

Political dimension 

 

The Eight Pillars 
of Sierra Leone’s 

Agenda for 
Prosperity 

 

Sustainable 

Development 

Dimensions 

 

Figure 1: Dimensions of Sustainable Development and Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity 

Prosperity 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 20 
 
 

 

engaged more than 70 percent of the 

national work force. 

 Strengthen role of civil society in the 
monitoring of prioritized actions for the 

SDGs, following up and reporting on 

this. 

 Explore innovative financing solution, 
and pursue appropriate mechanism to 

curb illicit financial flows. 

 Sustain and implement tax incentives for 
employers engaging women in 

top/managerial positions. 

 Increase coordination among actors 
within and between government 

institutions and non-governmental 

organizations including donor agencies. 

 Encourage research and ensure the full 
involvement of the university and 

research institutions in the 

implementation of the SDGs, drawing up 

programme of engagement in the areas of 

promoting science, technology and 

innovation locally and establishing 

partnerships with international groups in 

these areas for transfer of knowledge. 

 Improve overall national development 
coordination, reduce duplication of 

functions, and strengthen policy and 

programme implementation. 

 Increase capacity for development of 
bankable projects. 

 Incentivize civil servants to secure the 
minimum motivation necessary to 

effectively implement public 

programmes. Step up implementation of 

policies and programmes in this 

direction.    

 Implement findings of the national 
fragility assessment conducted by the 

UNDP and the Government. 

 

4.3 Consultation with Parliament 

Intensive discussions were held with a cross-

section of members of parliament (MPs) drawn 

from the parliamentary committees on various 

socioeconomic sectors of the public service. 

Government‟s rapid response to integrating the 

SDGs into local planning processes was lauded 

by MPs, recalling the mounting problems such as 

climate change effects that Sierra Leone was 

enormously exposed to, and for which the new 

global agenda must be taken very seriously. 

General messages were documented from these 

discusses and are summarized as follows:  

 

 Climate change: a plethora of 
international protocols and treaties on 

climate change have been passed but 

much has not been done in terms of 

putting these frameworks into action. 

 Thus questions were asked as to how 
soon the international community and 

sub-regional organizations would be 

ready to put these frameworks into 

action and save the world from the 

catastrophic impact of climate change on 

lives and property. It was reported here 

that in fact Sierra Leone had descended 

further down from being third most 

exposed to climate change effects after 

Bangladesh and Guinea-Bissau, to the 

second most exposed, now.    

 It was noted that parliament was not well 
educated on climate change issues.  

 Attitudinal and behavioural change was 
highlighted as a fundamental ingredient 

to the success of the SDGs, on which 

combating certain activities like 

deforestation and improving 

environmental sanitation hinges.   

 The existence of high maternal mortality 
ratio in Sierra Leone was extensively 

debated. The need for special strategies 

to minimize these rates—as well as 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 21 
 
 

 

under-five and infant mortality ratios—

was emphasized, noting that these issues 

transcend mainstream health sector, 

requiring improved household behaviour 

and attendant legislations and 

enforcement to improve good practices 

such as related to environment health, 

water, sanitation and hygiene.  

5. Process of Developing Monitoring and 

Evaluation (M&E) System for the SDGs 

Sierra Leone is determined to develop a better 

system for monitoring and reporting for the 

SDGs that is multilayered but well-coordinated, 

integrated and self-reinforcing.  

 

The Role of the Ministry of Finance and 

Economic Development (MoFED) in the Process  

Firstly, against the backdrop that there currently 

exist two key national development plans, the 

A4P and the NERS, it is prudent for the purpose 

of coherence and coordination that the annual 

(mostly process, activity and output) SDGs 

progress reporting be embedded in the 

monitoring and evaluation arrangement for the 

Agenda for Prosperity as the defining national 

plan, to which the National Ebola Recovery 

Strategy is also embedded. The A4P is the lead 

instrument for operationalizing the SDGs on the 

ground, therefore the first step led by MoFED 

was to review the three documents—the SDGs, 

A4P and the NERS—simultaneously, and draft 

an integrated results framework (IRF), aligning 

the SDGs and the NERS to the monitoring and 

evaluation framework of the Agenda for 

Prosperity.  

 

The next level was drafting a set of Sierra Leone 

specific SDGs indicators (SLSIs) which, before 

the global indicators were out, were formulated 

in December 2015 based on the 17 SDGs and 

169 targets, taking into consideration the realities 

on the ground. A guideline was developed to 

direct the formulation of these indicators during 

the first SDGs technical workshop organized in 

the country in December (see guideline in Box 

2). These indicators were revised in June at the 

second technical workshop, drawing from the 

240 indicators released by the UN since March, 

as well as outcome of the intensified nationwide 

consultations conducted in June.  

 

We now have advanced draft integrated results 

framework with Sierra Leone specific SDGs 

indicators, divided into two tiers. Tier 1 has draft 

indicators for which there are provisional 

baselines and targets for 2020, 2025 and 2030. 

Tier 2 has the full list of initially agreed 

indicators. So far there are 56 Tier 1 indicators 

and 139 Tier 2 indicators. This self-explains the 

priority SDG indicators for Sierra Leone for 

now, based on the principle of the need to have 

indicators that are simple, measurable, 

achievable, realistic and time bound (SMART), 

and these are the Tier 1. We shall further 

populate these with Tier 2 indicators as we 

continue building agreement on them and with 

availability of data.    

 

For both tiers, further discussions are needed to 

have a final list of indicators that the country is 

going to concentrate on.  

 

Priority indicators shall include those exclusively 

monitored by the g7+ countries that are signatory 

to the New Deal principles guiding development 

in fragile states, Sierra Leone being one (see 

extended discussion on this in the next section).  

 

Therefore, this report continues to signify work 

in progress in the domestication and planning for 

the SDGs implementation in Sierra Leone. It is 

meant to be a broad framework guiding a process 

that culminates into the production of a National 

SDGs Investment Plan (NaSIP) for Sierra Leone 

to be derived from a well costed SDGs needs 

based assessment.  

 

 

  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 22 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Annex 2 presents the two tier draft indicators, 

which we hope to rationalize further after the 

July HLPF.  There is an enormous task ahead of 

finalizing baselines and targets and gathering 

data for those where none is available.  

 

The Role of the Office of the President  

 

The government has been encountering the 

enormous challenge of having to do multifarious 

international benchmark reporting on the status 

of country governance and development, when 

this could have been rationalized and saved 

needed capacity space for public sector 

management. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Government MDAs have had to provide data and 

reports in response to various donor benchmark 

frameworks such as the Country Policy and 

Institutional Assessment (CPIA), the Afro 

Barometer, Corruption Perception Index, Mo 

Ibrahim Index, the Millennium Challenge 

Corporation, the MDGs (now the SDGs), among 

a range of others in addition to the burden of 

periodic reporting on benchmarks measuring 

progress on implementing national development 

plans such as the Agenda for Prosperity. To 

reduce the complexity of reporting requirement 

and rationalize benchmarks with a view to 

ensuring national ownership of reporting, the 

government is instituting the Sierra Leone 

Box 2: Guideline for the Formulation of Sierra Leone Specific SDGs Indicators 

at the First Technical Workshop held in Freetown on                                             

December 21
st
 and 22

nd
 2015 

----------- 

a. Used MDGs indicators and status as baselines where necessary 

b. Utilized initial draft SDGs Results Framework provided by the Central Planning 

Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate of the Ministry of Finance and Economic 

Development 

c. Utilized the initial draft National Integrated Results Framework—aligning the SDGs and 

NERS to the A4P Results Matrix—provided by the Central Planning, Monitoring and 

Evaluation Directorate  

d. Reviewed SDGs targets to agree and propose what was achievable in Sierra Leone 

e. Reflected on Sierra Leone development context in proposing and agreeing on indicators 

to ensure that doable ones were captured 

f. Drew from Sierra Leone‟s Vision 2035 in formulating these indicators (see the 

Introductory Chapter of the Agenda for Prosperity 2013-2018, p.xi) 

g. Some SDGs targets were straightforward, thus formulation of some indicators involved 

simple transformation or rewording of targets 

h. Reflected on other important documents, such as sector strategies; donor agency 

strategies; etc.  

i. Where targets were identified as similar, the ones that best captured the information 

revealed by all were maintained for the formulation of corresponding indicators  

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 23 
 
 

 

International Benchmark Systems (SLIBS) to be 

coordinated within the Office of the President in 

close collaboration with MoFED. The system 

tries to establish a hub for all benchmarks 

reporting development status on Sierra Leone to 

address overlaps, minimize risks of misreporting 

and advocate for eliminating indicators that are 

not necessary, while harmonizing others as the 

case may be. The SDGs are pivotal within the 

SLIBS and their indicators are a priority. 

Rationalized SLIBS benchmarks will all be 

aligned to the Eight Pillars of the Agenda for 

Prosperity.  

 

Role of Right to Access Information Commission 

(RAIC)  

The RAIC is an active member of the Global 

Partnership for Sustainable Development Data 

that uses the Open Data Revolution initiate to 

increase access to reliable data in all forms and 

formats that will enhance policy decision and 

development across nations. The Global 

Partnership is supporting efforts at national and 

subnational levels to develop and implement 

whole of government and multi-stakeholder 

SDG Data Revolution roadmaps. These 

customized roadmaps will serve as guiding 

frameworks for countries to harness efficient 

data for sustainable development, with particular 

emphasis on the SDGs and sustainable 

development priorities articulated in national 

plans. As part of this effort, a Toolbox is being 

developed iteratively based on needs and issues 

identified through member country national 

workshops and the partnership network. The first 

national workshop was held in Bogota, 

Columbia in May, followed by Sierra Leone in 

June coordinated by RAIC, drawing participants 

from across member countries. The Toolbox will 

draw on existing guidelines and best practices to 

support SDG monitoring, using real time 

dynamic, disaggregated data for evidence-based 

decision making and to enable appropriate 

country comparison. 

 

The participation of the country in this global 

initiative is guided by a national Open Data 

Council coordinated by RAIC drawing 

membership from all relevant government 

institutions, non-government organizations, and 

the university and research institutions; on the 

government side, it includes the Office of the 

President, Statistics Sierra Leone, the Ministry of 

Finance and Economic Development, and 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International 

Cooperation.  

 

Role of Statistics Sierra Leone 

Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL) is Government‟s 

lead institution in carrying out national surveys 

and certification of national data generated by 

public institutions and or in collaboration with 

non-governmental agencies. They have been 

central in defining the Sierra Leone SDGs 

indicators put together so far, and in setting 

baselines and targets. 

 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 

International Cooperation 

Sierra Leone‟s participation in the SDGs process 

has been guided by the diplomatic cover and 

guidance provided by this Ministry, which shall 

remain instrumental in the reporting on progress 

on the new global agenda to the international 

community. It is facilitating the country‟s 

participation in the HLPF review.  

 

Local Councils 

The Ministry of Finance and Economic 

Development and the Ministry of Local 

Government and Rural Development engaged 

the 19 local councils in Sierra Leone to integrate 

the SDGs into their district and municipal 

development plans.  This will ensure that future 

annual budget proposals of councils are aligned 

to the SDGs to aid progress reporting on the 

goals at the local level.   

 

  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 24 
 
 

 

Non-State Actors  

A non-state actor coalition on SDGs has been 

formed (see position paper contribution to this 

report in Annex 3). This coalition is expected to 

coordinator CSOs and NGOs efforts on SDGs 

implementation in the country. They will be 

instrumental in promoting citizen and 

community participation in the implementation 

and reporting process.  

 

Research input to the process  

A number of research papers have been slated to 

inform the finalization of the SDGs M&E system 

and preparation of national SDGs investment 

plan. A few are already underway, including 

child poverty measurement and analysis; 

multidimensional poverty approaches and 

projection of poverty status over the next 15 

years. Preliminary findings on the level of child 

poverty using multidimensional approach were 

presented at the second technical workshop 

organized to validate and revise the adaptation 

report in June. A key objective of this paper was 

to help establish baseline and target for 

monitoring child poverty in the country. This is 

work in progress, led by the Central Planning, 

Monitoring and Evaluation Division of MoFED 

in collaboration with the United Nations 

Children‟s Fund and Statistics Sierra Leone.       

 

6. Arrangement for Implementation of the 

SDGs  

6.1 Policy and Reporting Framework 

The SDGs will be implemented within the 

existing framework of implementing national 

development plans such as the current poverty 

reduction strategy paper or the Agenda for 

Prosperity, to ensure coherent, harmonized   and 

aligned national development efforts. The 

institutional framework is presented in Figure 2. 

It is proposed to have a Presidential Board on 

the SDGs (PBS) at the highest policy and 

political level to provide the overall policy and 

strategic guidance to the implementation of the 

SDGs, chaired by the President with members 

drawn from the Office of the President, the 

Ministry of Finance and Economic 

Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 

International Cooperation, the Ministry of 

Information and Communication, and 

representation from the Office of the UN 

Residence Coordinator. Below the PBS is the 

Ministerial Committee on the SDGs (MCS) to 

provide operational guidance to the SDGs 

process across line government ministries, 

department and agencies, at the central and local 

level, and across CSOs, NGOs, the private 

sector, the media, the research community and 

academia. The MCS will draw membership from 

MoFED, MFAIC, Statistics Sierra Leone, Open 

Government Initiative in the Office of the 

President, and other MDAs, such as the Right to 

Access Information Commission. Below this are 

the existing Pillar Working Groups on the 

Agenda for Prosperity which will be modified to 

capture technical follow-ups and reporting on the 

SDGs within the Pillars, drawing actors from the 

public sector and non-state institutions.      

  

An existing platform for SDGs review at the 

national level is the Development Partners 

Committee meetings that have been organized 

since the immediate post-conflict phase of the 

country to discuss general development issues of 

the state, bringing together government 

institutions and donor agencies, and co-chaired 

by government and development partners.  

6.2 The New Deal 

Sierra Leone is a signatory to the New Deal for 

International Engagement in Fragile States, and 

is committed to promoting use of country 

systems and Mutual Accountability Frameworks 

in the implementation of the SDGs, as it has 

been in the implementation of national plans. 

The New Deal was endorsed at the Busan High 

Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in 2011 by 

over 40 countries and organizations, including 

 

  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 25 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sierra Leone. It seeks to change the way national 

and international actors do business in fragile 

and conflict affected states through established 

set of basic principles for improved coordination. 

It focuses on interventions which reinforce 

country-owned and led priorities for 

peacebuilding and statebuilding in ways that 

enable them to more effectively transition out of 

fragility and conflict. Very recently in April 

2016, members of the International Dialogue on 

Peacebuilding and Statebuilding reiterated their 

commitment through the Stockholm Declaration 

on Addressing Fragility and Peacebuilding to 

implementing the New Deal as a means of 

ensuring effective delivery of Agenda 2030 and 

the SDGs in fragile and conflict affected 

environments.  

Furthermore, the New Deal aims to foster 

inclusive political dialogue and re-build trust 

within and between national and international 

actors operating in fragile contexts, including 

those characterizing Sierra Leone. The 

Government of Sierra Leone is currently 

engaged in devising practical ways of using the 

New Deal‟s principles in localizing the SDGs in 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 the country. Their integration into the national 

plans will (i) be consistent with the principle of 

political inclusiveness; (ii) give an adequate 

focus to security and justice; (iii) promote the 

building of sound economic foundations; and 

(iv) promote the building of capacity to generate 

domestic revenue and strengthen service 

delivery. 

As the current Chair of the g7+ countries,
11

 

Sierra Leone is particularly keen to give due 

consideration to the New Deal in the planning 

and implementation of the SDGs. The 

Government with work with development 

partners to ensure that aid towards 

implementation of the SDGs is transparent, 

timely and predictable, and channelled through 

country systems. 

                                                           
11

 The g7+ is a voluntary association of 20 

fragile and conflict affected states and leading 

member of the International Dialogue on 

Peacebuilding and Statebuilding that crafted the 

New Deal. 

Figure 2: Governance of the SDGs 

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 26 
 
 

 

To ensure effective monitoring of the SDGs in 

fragile contexts, the g7+ countries are 

developing specific monitoring mechanism 

under the chairmanship of Sierra Leone 

involving the establishment of an online portal to 

enhance follow-up and reporting on agreed set of 

fragility, peacebuilding and statebuilding related 

indicators. At the technical meeting held in 

Nairobi in December 2015, SDGs 6, 7, 8, 9, 16 

& 17 were identified as worthy of particular 

collective monitoring attention. For all 17 Goals, 

19 indicators were selected for monitoring, at 

least one indicator for each goal, with the 

exception of Goal 13 at the time (these are 

included and labelled in Annexes 2a&2b). A 

follow up g7+ technical meeting was held in 

May 2016 to finalize the indicators. Once agreed, 

the final indicators will be published on the 

online portal for monitoring. The benefit of 

doing this would be to draw common lessons and 

seek common advocacy positions across the 

group.  

Government is mindful of the need to increase 

resilience to economic fragility from external 

shocks, and the state of the millions of 

vulnerable children, youth, women and older 

persons that are caught in the devastating effects 

of fragile contexts and conflict. Thus, it is 

committed to institutionalizing early warning 

signs of conflict, health and environmental 

shocks within the framework of SDG 

implementation. It is mindful of the need to 

promote national cohesion as well as build 

neutral and professional state institutions 

consistent with SDG16. 

6.3 Regional and sub-regional dimension 

The government recognizes the regional and 

global dimensions to the country‟s sustainable 

development. This is central in the SDGs, and 

thus, local adaptation of the Goals shall be 

effectively linked to regional and global 

implementation of the Agenda, noting that 

development actions outside our borders directly 

or indirectly affect local development. This 

especially relates to the implementation of SDGs 

12, 13, 14, 15, &16, on environmental, 

governance, peace and security issues.  

7. Conclusion 

7.1 Summary of the Adaptation Process and 

Key Lessons 

Substantial efforts have been made to integrate 

the SDGs in Sierra Leone. Extensive debates and 

discussions were undertaken on different themes 

to inform the development of a broad framework 

(the Adaptation Report) to guide the 

implementation of the SDGs in the country. 

Leaving no one behind, balancing the three 

dimensions of sustainable development, the role 

of various actors in the process, and how can we 

make the SDGs better were among the issues 

debated to inform a direction to ensure that the 

SDGs yield better results in Sierra Leone. 

Indicators were developed drawing from the 

MDGs, existing national development 

frameworks and realities on the ground, and  

updated using global benchmarks and extended 

engagement on the new agenda across the 

country, involving state and non-state 

functionaries, local communities, the academia 

and the private sector. The engagement process 

was indeed broad and deep, and there is prospect 

for better results by 2030 if the consultative 

process and partnerships among all actors are 

sustained overtime.     

 

The key lessons learned are: (i) timely planning 

of initiatives has huge prospect of yielding 

results; (ii) participatory approaches, though 

potentially costly, remain fundamental to the 

production of effective plans and results; and (iii) 

it is impossible to have effective plans in a 

society without a good data system with 

capability to produce disaggregated information 

down to the lowest level and form possible.   



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 27 
 
 

 

7.2 Next Steps and Challenges 

The main steps going forward with the planning 

process for 2016-2018 are: 

a) Follow up with key government 
institutions, especially the national 

statistical office, and development 

partners to further discuss draft indicators 

and establish baseline data and targets for 

those without this information. 

b) Continue with the analysis of existing 
data and preparation of relevant research 

papers to inform the establishment of 

baselines and target. 

c) Ensure that MDAs capture the SDGs into 
their strategic plans submitted to MoFED 

for the next multi-year budget 

programming of 2017, 2018 and 2019.  

d) Commence SDGs needs based 
assessment towards the preparation of a 

national SDGs investment plan to 

determine the resources required to 

achieve targets by 2030.   

e) Reactivate the Agenda for Prosperity 
Pillar Working Groups meeting to embed 

SDGs planning, follow-up and reporting. 

f) Commence ministerial committee 
meetings on the SDGs. 

g) Commence discussions on the successor 
poverty reduction strategy informed by 

the SDGs and other developments. 

a) Sustain regular dialogue with actors 
involved in the implementation of the 

goals, including CSOs, local government 

and others. 

b)  Also integrate African Union Agenda 
2063 into national plans. 

Challenges include: 

a) Having many actors to coordinate 
b) Reliance on unpredictable donor support 

to carry out development programmes 

c) Sharp decline of state revenues  

d) Recovering from the extended effects of 
Ebola epidemic and ensuring diversified 

and inclusive economy 

e) Addressing data bottlenecks  
f) The country generally remaining a fragile 

state including exposure to climate 

change effects and facing large number 

of youths to provide effective and decent 

work for  

g) Inadequate incentives for public sector 
personnel  

Overcoming these problems requires: 

c) Sustained government commitment and 
enhanced partnership with development 

partners 

d) Increased capacity to develop bankable 
development projects  

e) Increase coordination within and between 
government agencies and non-state actors 

to reduce duplication of functions and 

minimize any wastage of resources  

f)  Step up implementation of reform 
programmes to increase capacity of the 

public sector and incentives 

g) Fully identify the drivers of fragility in 
the country and work out concrete action 

plan to address them in the context of the 

SDGs 



  

Annex 1:  

The SDGs and Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 29 
 
 

 

 

Annex 1: The SDGs and Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

Goal 1. End poverty in all its 

forms everywhere 
Targets by 2030: 

1.1 Eradicate extreme poverty 
1.2 Reduce proportion of men, women & children in absolute poverty by at 

least 50 percent 

1.3 Implement appropriate social protection systems & measures for all 
1.4 All men and women, poor and the vulnerable, have equal rights to 

socioeconomic, financial and technological resources 

1.5 Build resilience of the poor & vulnerable, including reduction of their 
exposure to socioeconomic, environmental & all forms of threats, shocks & 

disaster 

Lead Pillars: 
 

Pillar 1: Diversified Economic 

Growth 

Pillar 3: Accelerating Human 

Development 

Pillar 5: Labour and Employment 

Pillar 6: Social Protection 

 

MAFFS 

MFMR 

MoE 

MoHS  

MEST         

MWR 

MLSS 

MSWGCA 

MoFED 

Goal 2. End hunger, achieve 

food security and improved 

nutrition and promote 

sustainable agriculture 

Targets by 2030: 

2.1 End hunger and ensure access to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year 
round 

2.2 End all forms of malnutrition 
2.3 Double agricultural productivity and incomes of all types of small-scale 

food producers, supported by development services 

2.4 Ensure sustainable food production systems and resilient agricultural 
practices 

2.5 Maintain genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants, farmed & 
domesticated animals, & related wild species, & promoting fair sharing of 

benefits from utilization of genetic resources & traditional knowledge 

Lead Pillar: 
 

Pillar 1: Diversified Economic 

Growth 

 

 

MAFFS 

Goal 3. Ensure healthy lives 

and promote well-being for all 

at all ages 

 

 

 

 

 

Targets by 2030: 

3.1 Reduce global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live 
births; 

3.2 End preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, 
while reducing neonatal mortality to no more than 12 per 1,000 live births 

and under-5 mortality 25 per 1,000 live births; 

3.3 End AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria & neglected tropical diseases, & combat 
hepatitis, water-borne diseases & other communicable diseases; 

Lead Pillar:  

 

Pillar 3: Accelerating Human 

Development 

 

 

 

 

MoHS 

NAC 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 30 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

 

 

Goal 3. Ensure healthy lives 

and promote well-being for all 

at all ages 

3.4 Reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases; 
& promote mental health & well-being; 

3.5 Strengthen prevention & treatment of substance abuse; 
3.6 Halve number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents; 
3.7 Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, & 

integrate them into national strategies; 

3.8 Achieve universal & quality health-care coverage and access, including 
financial risk protection. 

 

3.9 Substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous 
chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and contamination 

 

Lead Pillar:  

 

Pillar 3: Accelerating Human 

Development 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MoHS 

NAC 

Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and 

equitable quality education 

and promote lifelong learning 

opportunities for all 

Targets by 2030: 

4.1 Ensure all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary and 
secondary education; 

4.2 Ensure all girls and boys have access to quality early childhood 
development, care and pre-primary education; 

4.3 Ensure equal access for all women and men to affordable and quality 
technical, vocational and tertiary education. 

4.4 Substantially increase the number of youth and adults having relevant tec-
voc skills; 

4.5 Eliminate gender disparities in education, and ensure equal access to all 
levels of education & vocational training for the vulnerable; 

4.6 Ensure all youth & a substantial proportion of adults, men & women, 
achieve literacy and numeracy; & 

4.7 Ensure all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote 
sustainable development. 

Lead Pillar:  

 

Pillar 3: Accelerating Human 

Development 

 

MEST 

Goal 5. Achieve gender 

equality and empower all 

women and girls 

Targets by 2030: 

5.1 End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere 
5.2 Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls 
5.3 Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage & 

female genital mutilation 

5.4 Recognize and value unpaid care & domestic work through the provision 

Lead Pillars:  

 

Pillar 7: Governance & Public Sector 

Reform 

Pillar 8: Gender & Women‟s 

Empowerment 

MSWGCA 

MoHS 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 31 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

of public services, infrastructure & social protection policies & the 

promotion of shared responsibility within the household and the family 

5.5 Ensure women‟s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for 
leadership at all levels of decision-making 

5.6 Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive 
rights as agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the 

International Conference on Population and Development and the Beijing 

Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their review 

conferences 

 

 

 

Goal 6. Ensure availability and 

sustainable management of 

water and sanitation for all 

Targets by 2030: 

6.1 Achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water 
for all 

6.2 Achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all 
6.3 Improve water quality, and halve the proportion of untreated wastewater and 

substantially increase recycling & safe reuse 

6.4 Substantially increase water-use efficiency, ensure sustainable withdrawals 
and supply of freshwater, & substantially reduce the number of people 

suffering from water scarcity 

6.5 Implement integrated water resources management, including through 
transboundary cooperation as appropriate 

6.6 Protect & restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, 
wetlands, rivers, aquifers & lakes 

Lead Pillar:  

 

Pillar 3: Accelerating Human 

Development 

 

 

 

 

MWR 

MoHS 

Goal 7. Ensure access to 

affordable, reliable, 

sustainable and modern energy 

for all 

Targets by 2030: 

7.1 Ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services; 
7.2 Increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy 

mix; 

7.3 Double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency. 
 

Lead Pillar:  

 

Pillar 4: International 

Competitiveness 

 

 

MoE 

 

Goal 8. Promote sustained, 

inclusive and sustainable 

economic growth, full and 

Targets by 2030: 

8.1 Sustain per capita economic growth at not less than 7 percent annual GDP 
growth LDCs; 

Lead Pillars:  

 

Pillar 1: Diversified Economic 

MAFFS 

MFMR 

MTCA 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 32 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

productive employment and 

decent work for all 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Goal 8. Promote sustained, 

inclusive and sustainable 

economic growth, full and 

productive employment and 

decent work for all 

8.2 Achieve higher levels of economic productivity, informed by labour-
intensiveness & other methods 

8.3 Promote development-oriented policies supporting productive activities, 
decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and 

encourage the formalization and growth of SMEs 

8.4 Improve global resource efficiency in consumption and production and 
endeavour to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation, 

in accordance with the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable 

Consumption and Production 

8.5 Achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women 
and men 

8.6 Substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education 
or training 

8.7 Take immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end 
modern slavery and human trafficking, & secure the prohibition and 

elimination of worst forms of child labour at work and in combat, by 2025 

 

8.8 Protect labour rights & promote safe and secure working environ. for all 
workers, including all migrants 

8.9 Devise and implement policies to promote sustainable tourism, creating 
jobs & promoting local culture & products 

8.10  Strengthen capacity of domestic financial institutions to encourage and 

expand access to banking, insurance and financial services for all 

Growth 

Pillar 5: Labour and Employment 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lead Pillars:  

 

Pillar 1: Diversified Economic 

Growth 

Pillar 5: Labour and Employment 

 

 

MLSS 

MoFED 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MAFFS 

MFMR 

MTCA 

MLSS 

MoFED 

Goal 9. Build resilient 

infrastructure, promote 

inclusive and sustainable 

industrialization and foster 

innovation 

Targets by 2030: 

9.1 Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including 
regional and transborder infrastructure 

9.2 Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, significantly raising 
industry‟s share of employment & GDP, double its share LDCs 

9.3 Increase access of small-scale industrial and other enterprises to financial 
services 

9.4 Upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable 
9.5 Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of 

Lead Pillar:  

 

Pillar 4: International 

Competitiveness 

 

 

 

BSL 

MWHI 

MTI 

MEST 

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 33 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

industrial sectors in all countries, in particular developing countries, 

including, by 2030, encouraging innovation and substantially increasing 

the number of research and development workers per 1 million people and 

public and private research and development spending 

Goal 10. Reduce inequality 

within and among countries 
Targets by 2030: 

10.1 Progressively achieve and sustain income growth of the bottom 
40 percent of the population at a rate higher than the national average 

10.2 Empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all 
10.3 Ensure equal opportunity and reduce inequalities of outcome, eliminating 

discriminatory laws, policies and practices & promoting appropriate 

legislation and policies 

10.4 Adopt policies, especially fiscal, wage and social protection policies, and 
progressively achieve greater equality 

10.5 Improve the regulation and monitoring of global financial markets and 
institutions and strengthen the implementation of such regulations 

10.6 Ensure enhanced representation and voice for developing countries in 
decision-making in global international economic and financial 

institutions 

10.7 Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of 
people 

Lead Pillars:  

 

Pillar 1: Diversified Economic 

Growth 

Pillar 3: Accelerating Human Dev. 

Pillar 5: Labour and Employment 

Pillar 6: Social Protection 

 

 

MAFFS 

MFMR 

MEST 

MWR 

MoFED 

MLSS 

MSWGCA 

NaCSA 

MFAIC 

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 34 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

Goal 11. Make cities and 

human settlements inclusive, 

safe, resilient and sustainable 

Targets by 2030: 

11.1 Ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic 
services and upgrade slums 

11.2 Provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport 
systems for all 

11.3 Enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for 
participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and 

management in all countries 

11.4 Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world‟s cultural and 
natural heritage 

11.5 Significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people 
affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to 

global gross domestic product caused by disasters 

11.6 Reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including 
by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste 

management 

11.7 Provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and 
public spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and 

persons with disabilities 

Lead Pillars: 

 

Pillar 2: Managing Natural 

Resources 

Pillar 3: Accelerating Human 

Development 

 

 

MLCPE 

MTA 

MoHS 

MTCA 

  Lead Pillar:  

Goal 12. Ensure sustainable 

consumption and production 

patterns 

Targets by 2030: 

12.1 Implement the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable 
Consumption and Production Patterns 

12.2 Achieve the sustainable management and efficient use of natural 
resources 

12.3 Halve per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and 
reduce food losses along production and supply chains, including post-

harvest losses 

12.4 Achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all 
wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international 

frameworks, and significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil 

12.5 Substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, 

 

Pillar 2: Managing Natural 

Resources 

 

MAFFS 

MFMR 

MMMR 

MLCPE 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 35 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

recycling and reuse 

12.6 Encourage companies, especially large and transnational companies, to 
adopt sustainable practices and to integrate sustainability information into 

their reporting cycle 

12.7 Promote public procurement practices that are sustainable, in accordance 
with national policies and priorities 

12.8 Ensure that people everywhere have the relevant information and 
awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in harmony with 

nature 

 

Goal 13. Take urgent action to 

combat climate change and its 

impacts 

Targets by 2030: 

13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and 
natural disasters in all countries 

13.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and 
planning 

13.3 Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional 
capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and 

early warning 

 

Lead Pillar: 

 

Pillar 2: Managing Natural 

Resources 

 

 

MLCPE 

EPA 

Goal 14. Conserve and 

sustainably use the oceans, 

seas and marine resources for 

sustainable development 

Targets by 2030: 

14.1 Prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in 
particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient 

pollution 

14.2 Sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid 
significant adverse impacts, strengthening their resilience, and take action 

for their restoration 

14.3 Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including 
through enhanced scientific cooperation at all levels 

14.4 Effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported 
and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices, and implement 

science-based management plans, restoring fish stocks in the shortest time 

feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield 

Lead Pillar: 
 

Pillar 2: Managing Natural Res. 

  

 

 

MFMR 

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 36 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

14.5 Conserve at least 10 percent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with 
national and international law and based on the best available scientific 

information 

14.6 Prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to 
overcapacity and overfishing, eliminate subsidies that contribute to 

illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and refrain from introducing 

new such subsidies 

14.7 Increase the economic benefits to small island developing States and least 
developed countries from the sustainable use of marine resources, 

including through sustainable management of fisheries, aquaculture and 

tourism 

 

Goal 15. Protect, restore and 

promote sustainable use of 

terrestrial ecosystems, 

sustainably manage forests,  

Targets by 2030: 

15.1 Ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and 
inland freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, 

wetlands, mountains and dry lands, in line with obligations under 

international agreements 

15.2 Promote the implementation of sustainable management of all types of 
forests, halt deforestation, restore degraded forests and substantially 

increase afforestation and reforestation 

15.3 Combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including land 
affected by  

Lead Pillar: 
 

Pillar 2: Managing Natural Res.  

  

 

 

 

SLEPA 

MLCPE 

MAFFS 

 

 

 

 

 

combat desertification, and 

halt and reverse land 

degradation and halt 

biodiversity loss 

15.4 desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land 
degradation-neutral world 

15.5 Ensure the conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their 
biodiversity, in order to enhance their capacity to provide benefits that are 

essential for sustainable development 

15.6 Take urgent and significant action to reduce the degradation of natural 
habitats, halt the loss of biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and prevent the 

extinction of threatened species 

15.7 Promote fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the 
utilization of genetic resources and promote appropriate access to such 

Lead Pillar: 
 

Pillar 2: Managing Natural Res.  

  

 

SLEPA 

MLCPE 

MAFFS 

 

 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 37 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

resources, as internationally agreed 

15.8 Take urgent action to end poaching and trafficking of protected species of 
flora and fauna and address both demand and supply of illegal wildlife 

products 

15.9 Introduce measures to prevent the introduction and significantly reduce 
the impact of invasive alien species on land and water ecosystems and 

control or eradicate the priority species 

15.10 Integrate ecosystem and biodiversity values into national and local 
planning, development processes, poverty reduction strategies and 

accounts 

Goal 16. Promote peaceful and 

inclusive societies for 

sustainable development, 

provide access to justice for all 

and build effective, 

accountable and inclusive 

institutions at all levels 

Targets by 2030: 

16.1 Significantly reduce all forms of violence and related death rates 
everywhere 

16.2 End abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against and 
torture of children 

16.3 Promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure 
equal access to justice for all 

16.4 Significantly reduce illicit financial and arms flows, strengthen the 
recovery and return of stolen assets and combat all forms of organized 

crime 

16.5 Substantially reduce corruption and bribery in all their forms 
16.6 Develop effective, accountable and transparent institutions at all levels 
16.7 Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-

making at all levels 

16.8 Broaden and strengthen the participation of developing countries in the 
institutions of global governance 

16.9 Provide legal identity for all, including birth registration 
16.10 Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in 

accordance with national legislation and international agreements  

Lead Pillar: 
 

Pillar 7: Governance & Public Sector 

Reform 

 

 

MOJ 

MSWGCA 

MIA 

ACC 

 

Goal 17. Strengthen the means 

of implementation and 

revitalize the Global 

Targets by 2030: 

Finance 

17.1 Strengthen domestic resource mobilization 

Lead Pillar: 
Pillar 7: Governance & Public Sector 

Reform 

MoFED 

MEST 

MTI 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 38 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

Partnership for Sustainable 

Development 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Goal 17. Strengthen the means 

of implementation and 

revitalize the Global 

Partnership for Sustainable 

Development 

17.2 Developed countries to implement fully their official development 
assistance commitments, achieving target of 0.7 percent of GNI for ODA 

to developing countries & 0.15 to 0.20 percent to LDCs; ODA providers 

to provide at least 0.20 percent to LDCs 

17.3 Mobilize additional financial resources for developing countries from 
multiple sources 

17.4 Assist developing countries in attaining long-term debt sustainability 
17.5 Adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for least developed 

countries 

Technology 
17.6 Enhance North-South, South-South and triangular regional and 

international cooperation on and access to science, technology and 

innovation 

17.7 Promote the development, transfer, dissemination and diffusion of 
environmentally sound technologies to developing countries 

17.8 Operationalize the technology bank and science, technology and 
innovation capacity-building mechanism for LDCs by 2017, & enhance 

use of enabling technology, esp. ICT 

Capacity-Building 

17.9 Enhance international support for implementing effective & targeted 
capacity-building in developing countries to support national plans to 

implement all the SDGs 

Trade 
17.10 Promote a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable 

multilateral trading system under the World Trade Organization 

17.11 Significantly increase the exports of developing countries, in particular 
with a view to doubling LDCs‟ share of global exports by 2020 

17.12 Realize timely implementation of duty-free and quota-free market access 
on a lasting basis for all LDCs, consistent with WTO decisions 

Systemic Issues 

17.13 Enhance global macroeconomic stability through policy coordination, 
coherence, etc. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lead Pillar: 
 

Pillar 7: Governance & Public Sector 

Reform 

 

 

SSL 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MoFED 

MEST 

MTI 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 39 
 
 

 

The SDGs The SDGs Target 
Sierra Leone’s Agenda for 

Prosperity 

Lead 

Actors/MDAs 

17.14 Enhance policy coherence for sustainable development 
17.15 Respect each country‟s policy space/leadership to establish & implement 

policies for poverty eradication and sustainable development 

17.16 Enhance the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
17.17 Encourage & promote effective PPP and civil society partnerships 
Data, Monitoring and Accountability 

17.18  By 2020, enhance capacity-building support to developing countries, 
including LDCs towards availability of high-quality, timely, reliable & 

disaggregated data 

17.19  By 2030, build on existing initiatives to develop measurements of 
progress on sustainable development, complementing GDP, & support 

statistical capacity-building in LDCs 

SSL 

 

 

 

 

  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 40 
 
 

 

 

 

 

Annex 2: 

 Sierra Leone Specific SDGs Indicators 

  



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 41 
 
 

 

Annex 2a: Tier1 Sierra Leone Specific SDGs Indicators with Baselines and Targets 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline              

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline figure 

(Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By 

End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

Goal 1. End poverty in 

all its forms everywhere 

1.1.1 Proportion of national population  in absolute poverty                                                                       53% 
Agenda for Prosperity 

p.13/SLIHS (2011) 
44% 35% 26% 

1.2.1 Proportion of extremely poor population by national poverty line                                                                        13.9% 
Agenda for Prosperity p.14 

SLIHS (2011) 
9.3% 4.6% 0.0% 

1.2.2 Proportion of national population  in absolute poverty                                                                       52.9% 
Agenda for Prosperity p.13/ 

SLIHS (2011) 
44.1% 35.3% 26.5% 

Goal 2. End hunger, 

achieve food security and 

improved nutrition and 

promote sustainable 

agriculture 

2.1.1 Proportion of national population in food poverty  47.7% 
Agenda for Prosperity p.13/ 

SLIHS (2011) 
31.8% 15.9% 0.0% 

2.1.4 Proportion of underweight women 9% SLDHS (2013) 6% 3% 0% 

2.2.1 Proportion of children under-5 who are stunted 37.9% SLDHS (2013) 30.3% 22.7%   

2.2.2 Proportion of children under-5 who are underweight 16.4% SLDHS (2013) 11% 5%   

2.2.3 Proportion of children under-5 who are wasted 9.3% SLDHS (2013) 7.0% 5.0%   

2.3.1 Rate of national food self-sufficiency 81% MAFFS (2015) 81% 94% 1 

  2.a.1 Proportion of national budget allocated to agriculture 2% MAFFS (2015) 6% 10% 10% 

Goal 3. Ensure healthy 

lives and promote well-

being for all at all ages 

 

 

3.1.1   Maternal mortality ratio per 100,000 live births 1165 SHDHS (2013) 800 435 70 

3.1.2 Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel 54% DHIS2 66% 78% 90% 

3.2.1 Under-5 mortality per 1,000 live births (g7+) 156 SHDHS (2013) 112 69 25 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 42 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline              

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline figure 

(Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By 

End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

Goal 3. Ensure healthy 

lives and promote well-

being for all at all ages 

  

3.2.2 Infant mortality  to 1,000 live births 39 SHDHS (2013) 30 21 12 

3.3.1  Incidence of HIV/AIDs per 100 people (aged 15-49) 0.12 mdgs.un.org (2013) 0.08 0.04 0 

3.2.2 Incidence of tuberculosis  per 100,000 population 313 mdgs.un.org (2013) 209 104 0 

3.b.2 Proportion of the population with access to affordable vaccines 

on a sustainable basis 
58% DHS 2013 69% 79% 90% 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Goal 4. Ensure inclusive 

and equitable quality 

education and promote 

lifelong learning 

opportunities for all  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.1.1 Proportion of girls completing primary education 65.4% 

2015 Annual School Census 

and UN projected population 

figure for Sierra Leone 

76.9% 88.5% 100.0% 

4.1.2 Proportion of boys completing primary education 66.6% 77.7% 88.9% 100.0% 

4.1.3 Proportion of girls completing junior secondary education 48.7% 65.8% 82.9% 100.0% 

4.1.4 Proportion of boys completing senior secondary education 53.6% 69.1% 84.5% 100.0% 

4.1.5 Proportion of girls completing senior secondary education 15.1% 43.4% 71.7% 100.0% 

4.1.6 Proportion of boys completing senior secondary education 21.7% 47.8% 73.9% 100.0% 

4.1.8 Net junior secondary school enrolment rate 30.2% 53.5% 76.7% 100.0% 

4.2.1 Net pre-primary school enrolment rate 8.4% 38.9% 69.5% 100.0% 

4.5.1 Ratio of girls to boys in primary education 1.01 

 

=/> 1 =/> 1 =/> 1 

4.5.2 Ratio of girls to boys in junior secondary education 0.95 0.97 0.98 1 

4.5.3 Ratio of girls to boys in senior secondary education 0.8 0.87 0.93 1 

4.5.4 Ratio of girls to boys in technical-vocational training  1.7 1.47 1.23 1 

4.6.1  Youth are literate (literacy rate ages 15-24) 64.3% 
World Bank Databank - 

World Development 

Indicators (2013) 

76.2% 88.1% 100.0% 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 43 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline              

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline figure 

(Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By 

End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

 

Goal 4. Ensure inclusive 

and equitable quality 

education and promote 

lifelong learning 

opportunities for all 

4.6.2 Adult literacy rate (literacy rate ages 15+) 45.7% 

World Bank Databank - 

World Development 

Indicators (2013) 

55.5% 65.2% 75.0%  

Goal 5. Achieve 

gender equality and 

empower all women 

and girls 

5.1.2 Proportion of women aged 15-49 with secondary and higher 

education (completed secondary  or more than secondary) 
7.70% SLDHS (2013)       

5.1.3 Share of women employed for cash in total number employed in 

non-agricultural activities 
23.2%   32.0% 41.0% 50.0% 

5.3.1 Proportion of women aged 20-45 married before/at age 18 48.0% SLDHS (2013) 32.0% 16.0% 0.0% 

5.3.2: Proportion of girls and women aged 15-49 years who have 

undergone female genital mutilation/cutting, by age  
90% SLDHS 2013 80% 70% 62% 

5.5.1 Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament 12.4% NEC 18.0% 23.0% 30.0% 

5.5.3 Proportion of women mayors and local councillors and 

chairpersons 
18% NEC 30% 40% 50% 

5.5.4 Proportion of women ward committee members 48% 
Ministry of Local 

Government and Rural 

Development 

30% 40% 50% 

5.6.2: Laws and regulations in place that guarantee women aged 15-49 

access to sexual and reproductive health care, information and 

education 

No 

Ministry of Justice, Ministry 

of Social Welfare, Gender 

and Children‟s Affairs, 

MOFED 

YES YES YES 

5.a.2: Legal framework (including customary law) in place that 

guarantees women‟s equal rights to land ownership and other 

entitlements (g7+) 

No 

Ministry of Justice, Ministry 

of Social Welfare, Gender 

and Children‟s Affairs, 

MoFED 

YES YES YES 

5.b.1: Proportion of individuals who own a mobile telephone, by sex No SSL, NATCOM, DHMT YES YES YEs 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 44 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline              

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline figure 

(Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By 

End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

 

5.c.1: Systems in place to track and make public allocations for gender 

equality and women‟s empowerment 

 

 

 

 

 

No MOFED YES YES YES 

Goal 6. Ensure 

availability and 

sustainable management 

of water and sanitation 

for all 

6.1.1  Proportion of the population with access to improved drinking 

water source at national, rural and urban settings (g+)  
62.6% 

World Bank Databank - 

World Development 

Indicators (2015) 

75.1% 87.5% 100.0% 

6.1.4 No. of hydrological Monitoring stations installed  27         

Goal 7. Ensure access to 

affordable, reliable, 

sustainable and modern 

energy for all 

7.1.1 Proportion of households with access to electricity (national grid) 

(g+)  
13.5% SLDHS (2013) 19.0% 24.5% 30.0% 

Goal 8. Promote 

sustained, inclusive and 

sustainable economic 

growth, full and 

productive employment 

and decent work for all 

8.1 .1 Rate of per capita economic growth -12.8% 

World Bank Databank - 

Global Economic Prospects 

(2015) 

=/>7% =/>7% =/>7% 

8.5.1 Rate of national unemployment 4% 
SL 2014 Labour Force Survey 

Report (2015) 
      

8.5.2 Proportion of skilled labor force to the total labor force 6% 
SL 2014 Labour Force Survey 

Report (2015); pg47 
      

8.6.2 Proportion of youth with secondary or higher education 55% 
SL 2014 Labour Force Survey 

Report (2015); pg68 
      

8.9.1 Ratio of revenue from tourism sector to GDP 

 

 

10% Agenda for Prosperity, 2013       

         



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 45 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline              

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline figure 

(Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By 

End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

Goal 9. Build resilient 

infrastructure, promote 

inclusive and sustainable 

industrialization and 

foster innovation 

9.2.1 Share of manufacturing in total GDP 2% 
Agenda for Prosperity, 2013; 

Pg35 
      

9.2.2 Share of manufacturing in total employment 2% 
Agenda for Prosperity, 2013; 

Pg36 
      

Goal 10. Reduce 

inequality within and 

among countries 

10.1.2 Share of income of the bottom 20% income earners in total 

household income 
8% 

World Bank Databank - 

World Development 

Indicators (2011) 

8% 9% 9% 

10.2.1 Ratio of urban to rural absolute poverty 212% SSL (SLIHS 2011) 191% 171% 150% 

16. Promote peaceful and 

inclusive societies for 

sustainable development, 

provide access to justice 

for all and build 

effective, accountable 

and inclusive institutions 

at all levels 

16.5.17 Proportion of persons on remand without indictment in the 

capital of Freetown 
51% (2016) Sierra Leone Legal Aid Board 35% 30% 25% 

 

 

Goal 17. Strengthen the 

means of implementation 

and revitalize the Global 

Partnership for 

Sustainable Development 

Minimum salary earned by grade 7 staff in the civil service USD $169.87 HRMO 
USD 

$1,000 

USD 

$1,500 

USD 

$2,000 



 

Annex 2b: Tier 2 Sierra Leone Specific SDGs Indicators (full list) 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

Goal 1. End poverty in 

all its forms everywhere 

1.1.1 Proportion of national population  in absolute poverty                                                                       52.9% 
Agenda for Prosperity 

p.13/SLIHS (2011) 
44.1% 35.3% 26.5% 

1.1.2 Proportion below international poverty line in extreme 

poverty (g+) 
     

1.2.1 Proportion of extremely poor population by national food 

poverty line                                                                        
13.9% 

Agenda for Prosperity 

p. 14/SLIHS (2011) 
9.3% 4.6% 0.0% 

1.2.2  Proportion of male population  in multi-dimensional poverty           

1.2.3  Proportion of female population in multi-dimensional 

poverty  
          

1.2.4  Proportion of children in multi-dimensional poverty            

Goal 2. End hunger, 

achieve food security 

and improved nutrition 

and promote sustainable 

agriculture 

2.1.1 Proportion of national population in food poverty  47.7% 
Agenda for Prosperity 

p.13/SLIHS (2011) 
31.8% 15.9% 0.0% 

2.1.2 Proportion of male population in food poverty           

2.1.3 Proportion of  female population in food poverty           

2.1.4 Proportion of underweight women 9.1% SLDHS (2013) 6.1% 3.0% 0.0% 

2.1.4 Proportion of underweight men 11.3% SLDHS (2013)       

2.1.5 Proportion of population with moderate or severe food 

insecurity (g+)  
     

2.2.1 Proportion of children under-5 who are stunted 37.9% SLDHS (2013) 24.0% 10.0%   

2.2.2 Proportion of children under-5 who are underweight 16.4% SLDHS (2013) 10.7% 5.0%   

2.2.3 Proportion of children under-5 who are wasted 9.3% SLDHS (2013) 7.0% 5.0%   

2.3.1 Rate of national food self-sufficiency 81.2% MAFFS (2015) 81.2% 93.7% 100.0% 

  2.a.1 Proportion of national budget allocated to agriculture 2.1% MAFFS (2015) 6% 10% 10% 

       



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 47 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 
Goal 3. Ensure healthy 

lives and promote well-

being for all at all ages 

  

  

  

3.1.1 Maternal mortality ratio per 100,000 live births 1165 SHDHS (2013) 800 435 70 

3.1.2 Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel 54.0% DHIS2 66.0% 78.0% 90.0% 

3.1.3 Proportion of births by disability women attended by skilled 

health personnel 
          

3.2.1 Under-5 mortality per 1,000 live births (g7+) 156 SHDHS (2013) 112 69 25 

3.2.2 Infant mortality  per 1,000 live births 39 SHDHS (2013) 30 21 12 

3.3.1  Incidence of HIV/AIDs among 15-49 year olds 0.12 mdgs.un.org (2013) 0.08 0.04 0 

3.2.2 Incidence of tuberculosis  per 100,000 population 313 mdgs.un.org (2013) 209 104 0 

3.3.3 Death rate associated with malaria              

3.7.1 Adolescent birth rate (aged 10-14 years) per 1,000 women in 

that age group 
          

3.7.2. Adolescent birth rate (aged 15-19 years) per 1,000 women 

in that age group 
          

  
3.b.1 Proportion of the population with access to affordable 

medicines on a sustainable basis 
          

  
3.b.2 Proportion of the population with access to affordable 

vaccines on a sustainable basis 
58.0% DHS 2013 69.0% 79.0% 90.0% 

Goal 4. Ensure inclusive 

and equitable quality 

education and promote 

lifelong learning 

opportunities for all 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.1.1 Proportion of girls completing primary education 65.4% 

2015 Annual School 

Census and UN 

projected population 

figure for Sierra 

Leone 

76.9% 88.5% 100.0% 

4.1.2 Proportion of boys completing primary education 66.6% 77.7% 88.9% 100.0% 

4.1.3 Proportion of girls completing junior secondary education 48.7% 65.8% 82.9% 100.0% 

4.1.4 Proportion of boys completing junior secondary education 53.6% 69.1% 84.5% 100.0% 

4.1.5 Proportion of girls completing senior secondary education 15.1% 43.4% 71.7% 100.0% 

4.1.6 Proportion of boys completing senior secondary education 21.7% 47.8% 73.9% 100.0% 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 48 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Goal 4. Ensure inclusive 

and equitable quality 

education and promote 

lifelong learning 

opportunities for all 

4.1.7 Net primary school enrolment rate by gender and region (g+)         

4.1.8 Net junior secondary school enrolment rate 30.2% 53.5% 76.7% 100.0% 

4.2.1 Net pre-primary school enrolment rate 8.4% 38.9% 69.5% 100.0% 

4.5.1 Ratio of girls to boys in primary education 1.01 

 

=/> 1 =/> 1 =/> 1 

4.5.2 Ratio of girls to boys in junior secondary education 0.95 0.97 0.98 1 

4.5.3 Ratio of girls to boys in senior secondary education 0.8 0.87 0.93 1 

4.5.4 Ratio of girls to boys in technical-vocational training  1.7 1.47 1.23 1 

4.5.5 Proportion of disabled children of primary school age 

enrolled in primary education 
          

4.5.6 Proportion of disabled children of secondary school age 

enrolled in secondary education 
          

4.5.7 Proportion of disabled persons aged 15 and above enrolled in 

technical-vocational training 
          

4.6.1  Youth literacy (persons aged 15-24) 64.3% 
World Bank 

DataBank - World 

Development 

Indicators (2013) 

76.2% 88.1% 100.0% 

4.6.2 Adult literacy rate (literacy rate ages 15+) 45.7% 
World Bank 

DataBank - World 

Development 

Indicators (2013) 

55.5% 65.2% 75.0% 

4.a.1 Proportion of schools with access to electricity           

4.a.2 Proportion of schools with access to basic drinking water           

4.a.4 Proportion of schools with access to adapted infrastructure 

for student with disabilities 
          

4.c.1 Proportion of qualified teachers in pre-primary education           

4.c.2 Proportion of qualified teachers in primary education           



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 49 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 
4.c.3 Proportion of qualified teachers in junior secondary 

education 
          

4.c.4 Proportion of qualified teachers in senior secondary 

education 
          

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Goal 5. Achieve 

gender equality and 

empower all women 

and girls 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.1.2 Proportion of women aged 15-49 with secondary and higher 

education  
7.70% SLDHS (2013)    

5.1.3 Share of women employed for cash in total number 

employed in non-agricultural activities 
23.2%   32.0% 41.0% 50.0% 

5.2.1. Proportion of women and girls aged 15-49 years subjected 

to physical violence by a current or former intimate partner in the 

previous 12 months   

  SSL 20% 13% 5% 

5.2.2. Proportion of women and girls aged 15-49 years subjected 

to psychological violence by a current or former intimate partner 

in the previous 12 months 

  
SSL, Ministry of 

Health 
-5% -10% -15% 

5.2.3. Proportion of women and girls aged 15-49 years subjected 

to sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in the 

previous 12 months 

  SSL 5% 3% 1% 

5.2.4: Proportion of women and girls aged 15-49 subjected to 

sexual violence by persons other than an intimate partner in the 

previous 12 months, by age and place of occurrence 

  SSL 5% 3% 1% 

5.3.1 Proportion of women aged 20-45 married before/at age 18 48.0% SLDHS (2013) 32.0% 16.0% 0.0% 

5.3.2: Proportion of girls and women aged 15-49 years who have 

undergone female genital mutilation/cutting   
90% SLDHS 2013 80% 70% 62% 

5.5.1 Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament 12.4% NEC 18.0% 23.0% 30.0% 

5.5.2 Proportion of women in Grade 7 and above in the national 

civil service 
  HRMO 30% 40% 50% 

5.5.3 Proportion of women mayors and local councilors and 

chairpersons 
18% NEC 30% 40% 50% 

5.5.4 Proportion of female Paramount Chiefs   Ministry of Local 

Government and 

Rural Development 

30% 40% 50% 

5.5.4 Proportion of women ward committee members 48% 30% 40% 50% 

5.5.6 Proportion of businesses with female employees in 

managerial positions (as defined in Section 40 Finance Act 2016) 
  NRA, MOFED 30% 40% 50% 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 50 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

 

Goal 5. Achieve 

gender equality and 

empower all women 

and girls 

5.6.1: Proportion of women aged 15-49 years who make their own 

informed decisions regarding sexual relations, contraceptive use 

and reproductive health care  

  

SSL, Ministry of 

Social Welfare, 

Gender and 

Children‟s Affairs 

10% 25% 40% 

5.6.2: Laws and regulations in place that guarantee women aged 

15-49 access to sexual and reproductive health care, information 

and education 

No 

Ministry of Justice, 

Ministry of Social 

Welfare, Gender and 

Children‟s Affairs, 

MOFED 

YES YES YES 

5.a.1: (a) Share of women among owners or rights bearers of 

agricultural land, type of tenure 
  

SSL, Ministry of 

Land and Country 

Planning 

10% 20% 30% 

5.a.2: Legal framework (including customary law) in place that 

guarantees women‟s equal rights to land ownership and other 

entitlements (g7+) 

No 

Ministry of Justice, 

Ministry of Social 

Welfare, Gender and 

Children‟s Affairs, 

MoFED 

YES     

Goal 6. Ensure 

availability and 

sustainable management 

of water and sanitation 

for all 

6.1.1  Proportion of the population with access to improved 

drinking water source at national, rural and urban settings (g+) 
62.6% 

World Bank Databank 

- World Development 

Indicators (2015) 

75.1% 87.5% 100.0% 

6.1.2 Proportion of the population with access to improved 

sanitation and hygiene (national, rural and urban settings) 
          

6.1.7  Proportion of water point that are operational           

Goal 7. Ensure access to 

affordable, reliable, 

sustainable and modern 

energy for all 

7.1.1 Proportion of households with access to electricity (national 

grid) (g+) 
13.5% SLDHS (2013) 19.0% 24.5% 30.0% 

7.2.1 Proportion of hydro-power to total energy supply           

7.2.2 Proportion of other renewable energy use (solar, biomass, 

etc.) to total energy supply 

 

          

7.2.2 Proportion of overall renewable energy use (hydro, solar, 

biomass etc.) to total energy supply 
          

7.3.1 Proportion of technical loss in energy production           



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 51 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

Goal 8. Promote 

sustained, inclusive and 

sustainable economic 

growth, full and 

productive employment 

and decent work for all 

 

 

 

 

  

 

8.1 .1 Rate of per capita economic growth -12.8% 

World Bank Databank 

- Global Economic 

Prospects (2015) 

=/>7% =/>7% =/>7% 

8.3.1 Ratio of formal to informal SMEs in the country           

8.3.2 Proportion of SMEs accessing loans from financial 

institutions 
          

8.5.1 Rate of national unemployment 4% 
SL 2014 Labour 

Force Survey Report 

(2015) 

      

8.5.2 Proportion of skilled labor force to the total labor force 6% 
SL 2014 Labour 

Force Survey Report 

(2015); pg47 

      

8.6.1 Proportion of youth (aged 15-34) in gainful wage 

employment 
          

8.6.2 Proportion of youth with secondary or higher education 55% 
SL 2014 Labour 

Force Survey Report 

(2015); pg68 

      

8.6.3 Proportion of male youth with secondary or higher education           

8.6.4 Proportion of female youth with secondary or higher 

education 
          

8.6.5 Proportion of youth with no formal education but with 

vocational training 
          

8.6.6 Proportion of male youth with no formal education but with 

vocational training 
          

8.6.7 Proportion of female youth with no formal education but 

with vocational training 
          

8.9.1 Ratio of revenue from tourism sector to GDP 10% 
Agenda for 

Prosperity, 2013 
      

8.9.2 Annual growth of employment in the tourism sector           

8.10.1 Proportion of farm holdings accessing loans in the last 12 

months 
          

8.10.2 Proportion of total formal loans disbursed to rural sector           



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 52 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 

8.10.5. Rate of unemployment by sex and region   SLIHS(2011) 
  

    

8.b.1 Total government spending in social protection and 

employment programmes as percentage of the national budget and 

GDP (g+) 

  

 

  

Goal 9. Build resilient 

infrastructure, promote 

inclusive and sustainable 

industrialization and 

foster innovation 

9.1.1 Proportion of total national road network that is asphalted 

(all weather trunk roads) 
          

9.2.1 Share of manufacturing in total GDP 2% 
Agenda for Properity, 

2013; Pg35 
      

9.2.2 Share of manufacturing in total employment 2% 
Agenda for Properity, 

2013; Pg36 
      

9.a.1 Amount of investments in infrastructure as a % of GDP (g+)      

Goal 10. Reduce 

inequality within and 

among countries 

10.1.1 Share of food expenditure in total consumption of the 

bottom 40% household income earners (g+) 
          

10.1.2 Share of income of the bottom 20% income earners in total 

household income 
7.9% 

World Bank 

DataBank - World 

Development 

Indicators (2011) 

8.3% 8.6% 9.0% 

10.2.1 Ratio of urban to rural absolute poverty 2.12 SSL (SLIHS 2011) 1.91 1.71 1.50 

Goal 11. Make cities and 

human settlements 

inclusive, safe, resilient 

and sustainable 

11.1.1 Proportion of population living in slum communities or 

informal settlements (g+)  
          

 11.1.3 Proportion of slum households in urban centres            

11.5.1 Proportion of population living in disaster prone areas           

11.7.1 Total area of public/green space over total urban space           

Goal 12. Ensure 

sustainable consumption 

and production patterns 

12.3.1 Proportion of post-harvest losses in agricultural food 

production 
          

12.6.1 Number of companies submitting annual Environmental & 

Social Management Action Plan 
          

12.7.1 Public procurement practices that are sustainable (g+)      

Goal 13. Take urgent 
13.1.1 Proportion of population aware of climate-related hazards 

& consequences of natural disasters 
          



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 53 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 
action to combat climate 

change and its impacts 

13.2.1 Number of relevant environmental treaties and policies 

domesticated, enforced and reported on to combat climate change 
          

13.3.1 Proportion of primary and secondary schools with 

curricular on climate change issues  
          

Goal 14. Conserve and 

sustainably use the 

oceans, seas and marine 

resources for sustainable 

development 

14.2.2 Proportion of marine ecosystem restored & protected           

14.4.2 Proportion of fisheries & marine violation cases prosecuted 

and concluded 
          

14.5.1 Proportion of national coastal area under effective 

conservation and monitoring (g+) 
          

Goal 15. Protect, restore 

and promote sustainable 

use of terrestrial 

ecosystems, sustainably 

manage forests, combat 

desertification, and halt 

and reverse land 

degradation and halt 

biodiversity loss 

15.1.2 Proportion of protected areas over total land area space           

15.1.3 Proportion of biome conserved to total land area           

15.2.1 Rate of deforestation            

 15.3.1 Proportion of degraded land over total land area           

15.3.2  Proportion of degraded land restored, reclaimed, or 

rehabilitated  
          

16. Promote peaceful 

and inclusive societies 

for sustainable  

development, provide 

access to justice for all 

and build effective, 

accountable and 

inclusive institutions at 

all levels 

16.3.1 Proportion of youth behind bars (by offences & gender)       

16.3.2 Sentenced detainees as % of overall prison population (g+)       

16.5.1 Corruption perception index           

16.5.10 Proportion of local courts with paralegals           

16.5.14 Proportion of court cases concluded in the last 12 months           

16.5.15 Average length of time people served on remand without 

indictment (by offences, gender and age)  
          

16.5.16 Proportion of persons on remand without indictment (by 

offences, gender and age)  
          



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 54 
 
 

 

The Goals Proposed SL Indicators (Dec 2015) 

Baseline 

(end of 

December 

2015) 

Source of baseline 

figure (Date) 

 Targets 

By End 

2020 

By End 

2025 

By End 

2030 
16.5.17 Proportion of persons on remand without indictment in the 

capital of Freetown 
51% 

(2016) 
Legal Aid Board 35% 30% 25% 

16.6.4 Proportion of police stations with paralegals           

16.16.1 Proportion of population subjected to physical, 

psychological or sexual violence within the last 12 months (g+) 
     

Goal 17. Strengthen the 

means of 

implementation and 

revitalize the Global 

Partnership for 

Sustainable 

Development 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17.1.1 Total Domestic Revenues as % of GDP (g+)           

17.8.1 Internet Users per 100 Inhabitants           

17.8.2 Proportion of households under Mobile Cellular coverage           

17.8.3 Mobile Cellular Subscribers per 100 inhabitants           

17.9.1 Proportion of personnel from Grade 7 and above in the 

Civil Service 
          

17.11.1 Ratio of total exports to GDP           

17.11.2 Share of value added manufacturing in total merchandise 

exports 
          

17.13.1 Rate of inflation           

17.13.2 Growth rate in international reserves           

17.13.3 Public debt to GDP ratio           

17 15.1 Proportion of external funding recorded in the national 

budget 
          

17.18.1 Share of national development expenditure devoted to 

development of national statistical and monitoring and evaluation  

systems 

          

 
17.19.1 Minimum salary of grade 7 staff in the civil service USD 

$169.87 
HRMO USD 

$1,000 

USD 

$1,5000 

USD 

$2000 

17.19.2 Proportion of technical staff in the civil service   HRMO 5,000 8,000 10,000 

 



 

 

Annex 3: Civil Society Contribution to the National SDGs Adaptation Report 

 

CSO Position Paper on SDG Implementation  

Walk the talk: Demanding social Accountability and clear strategies for 

inclusiveness in SDG implementation 

“…The major challenge in ensuring success of the SDGs is working out a proactive and effective implementation strategy that must include 

firstly, a seamless transition between the MDGs and the SDGs and secondly, the development of new approaches that include issues of multi-

stakeholder ownership, institutional partnership, universality, empirical analysis and knowledge sharing…” (H.E Dr Samura Kamara – 

High level plenary meeting on adoption of post 2015 development Agenda). 

We, the representatives of a cross section of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) in Sierra Leone; APPLAUD the 

courage and commitment of the Government of Sierra Leone in offering themselves for the Voluntary National 

Review (VNR) to present their national SDG implementation plan during the 2016 HLPF, in New York in line with 

General Assembly Resolution 67/290 and the 2030 Agenda under the auspices of the ECOSOC. 

RECOGNIZE commitment of CSOs in Sierra Leone in achieving Agenda 2030, notably through participation in 

various consultations at the National, Regional and Global levels; and making valuable submissions to various 

Government and United Nations (UN) led technical teams at different levels and COGNISANT of the spaces 

provided for CSOs input within the VNR (sections 2.1.5, 3.1.5, 3.1.6); 

ACKNOWLEDGE the various Initiatives by the UN as well as global, regional and thematic consultations on 

Agenda 2030. This includes efforts of the United Nations General Assembly‟s Open Working Group on 

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); 

NOTE the scale and ambition of the SDG and acknowledge that pursuance of the main theme of the HLPF “Leave 

no one behind” will not only require the participation of all but also mobilizing all available resources for effective 

implementation of the Agenda.  

ADD our voice to the HLPF by calling the attention of the Government of Sierra Leone and other UN Member 

states to the following; 

1. Apply the principle of “Leave no one behind” in all relevant policies and programmes 
As the main theme of the 2016 HLPF is „Leave no one behind‟, Government should develop detailed 

national engagement strategies that consider carefully who to reach, why they are important to 

communicate with as to mobilize communities around the SDGs. It is also the view of CSO‟s that the 

engagement process should be very widespread, cutting across regional and political divide and 

concerns. We recommend that the Government as a first step undertake in-depth analyses of the 

structural, financial, political and social drivers of inequality and exclusion that exist in the country. 

Additionally, conscious efforts should be made to include the views of all vulnerable and minority 

groups (Physically challenged and any others). To increase meaningful participation and inclusion we 

recommend the use of various participatory formats such as group discussions, interviews, radiophone 

in, television and panel interviews, specific groups and expert group meetings. This will ensure the 

review has input from a broad representation and is validated. 

 

2. Environmental sustainability, natural resources and disaster risk management must be 
implemented in a balanced and integrated manner. 

„In care of our common home‟ we are concerned that the exploitation of our natural resources and 

biodiversity is neither respecting ecological boundaries nor is it fully translating into; value-adding 

activities, adequate employment opportunities, and enhanced economic and environmental returns for 



Sierra Leone: SDGs Adaptation Report, July 2016    Page 56 
 
 

 

the country. We are concerned about the challenges posed by climate change, desertification and land 

degradation, natural disasters such as floods, loss of biodiversity, management of waste and air 

pollution. In this regard we are determined to work with the government of Sierra Leone in addressing 

the potential adverse effects of these challenges. Mindful of the importance of ensuring the 

availability of safe water supply, proper hygiene and sanitation for all segments of the Sierra Leonean 

society, we call on the government of Sierra Leone to foster sustained development cooperation and 

investment in environmental protection and natural resource management including; 

- Attitudinal and behavioral change in consumption and production patterns  
- Clean energy programme 
- Technology transfer  
- ICT  
  

3.  Increase resilience to economic fragility from external shocks  
The Agenda 2030 indeed recognizes that millions of vulnerable children, youth, women and older 

persons are caught in the devastating effects of fragile contexts and conflict. As a signatory of the 

New Deal for International Engagement in Fragile States the government has committed to reflecting 

on the New Deal‟s Peace and State building Goals (PSGs) in domesticating the SDGs and ensuring 

that localization of the SDGs is (i) consistent with political inclusiveness; (ii) gives adequate focus on 

security and justice. We therefore urge government to institutionalize early warning signs of conflict, 

health and environmental shocks within the framework of SDG implementation. Further we 

recommend stronger commitment by government in creating national cohesion as well as building 

neutral and professional state institutions consistent with SDG16.  

 

4. Challenges in the implementation of the post 2015 development Agenda 
As noted by the government of Sierra Leone, we do agree that implementation of the SDGs falls 

within national development plans. In view of these plans, we urge the government of Sierra Leone to 

deepen community engagement and suggest that government outlines its key outreach priorities in 

more detail, especially how civil society will be included in implementation and monitoring. Strong 

reference to this will demonstrate the commitment of the Government of Sierra Leone to work in 

multi-stakeholder partnerships. We also suggest that the report highlights the need to conduct 

sustained public sensitization to improve awareness on SDGs in grassroots communities by working 

closely with civil society through a) the Creation of a calendar of engagement, and (b) Having 

thematic round-tables Consequent of the above we recommend that the Government of Sierra Leone‟s 

includes its commitment to supporting new and innovative approaches for data disaggregation for all 

development initiatives.  

 

 

 

 


